Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to provide person-centered care and support to people living with dementia. It involves following and contributing to an established individual plan.
This unit applies to workers in a residential or community context, including family homes. Work performed requires some discretion and judgment and may be carried out under regular direct or indirect supervision.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards, and industry codes of practice.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
1.  Prepare to provide support to those affected by dementia
1.1 Apply person-centered care approaches to all interactions with the person living with dementia
1.2 Interpret individualized plan and familiarise self with the specific needs and wants of the person living with dementia
1.3 Identify and address person’s needs for a stable and familiar environment
1.4 Recognise signs consistent with financial, physical or emotional abuse or neglect of the person and report to an appropriate person
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills) that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
● Provided support to 2 different people living with dementia:
○ using a person-centered approach to support
○  using appropriate communication strategies
○  assisting in implementing a range of suitable activities that meet the person’s needs.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
●  Up to date research on dementia and the different manifestations of dementia, including:
○  Alzheimer’s disease
○ vascular dementia or multi-infarct dementia
○  Lewy bodies
○ excessive alcohol intake or Korsakov Syndrome
○ fronto temporal lobar degeneration (FLTD) including Pick’s disease
○ Huntington’s disease
○  Parkinson’s disease
○ younger onset dementia
● Dementia as a progressive neurological condition, including pathological features:
○ amyloid plaques
○  neurofibrillary tangles
○  loss of connection between cells and cell death
●  Common indicators and symptoms of dementia
●  Behaviours of concern, needs driven behaviour model and de-escalation procedures
●  Progression of dementia and potential impact on the person with dementia, their family and significant others, including:
○  depression
○  loss and grieving
○  anger
○  despair
○  social embarrassment a family member might feel
○  isolation
○  financial burden on the family
○  social devaluation
●  Principles of person-centred approach to support
●  Relevant activities which enhance self-esteem and pleasure in the person’s life, minimise boredom, and distract from or eliminate behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia
●  Competency and image enhancement as a means of addressing devaluation
●  Verbal and non-verbal communication strategies including:
○  reality orientation
○  reminders of the day, the time, relationships, occasions
○  reassuring words, phrases and body language
○  validation
○  empathy
○  acceptance of the person’s reality
○  acknowledgement
○  allowing expressions of distress
○  providing verbal and physical reassurance
○  frequent reminiscence to connect with person.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in an ageing support workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. These are situations relating to an emergency or unplanned procedures where assessment in these circumstances would be unsafe, impractical or threaten the dignity of the older person.
The following conditions must be met for this unit:
●  Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including individualised plans and any relevant equipment outlined in the plan
●  Modelling of industry operating conditions, including scenarios that reflect a range of dementia support services involving a range of dementia symptoms and behaviours of concern
Overall, assessment must involve some real interactions with people with dementia, colleagues and families/carers.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - http://www.cshisc.com.au
1.  Prepare to provide support to those affected by dementia
1.1. Apply person-centred care approaches to all interactions with the person living with dementia
1.2.  Interpret individualised plan and familiarise self with the specific needs and wants of the person living with dementia
1.3. Identify and address a person’s needs for a stable and familiar environment
1.4.  Recognise signs consistent with financial, physical or emotional abuse or neglect of the person and report to an appropriate person
1.1 – Apply person-centred care approaches to all interactions with the person living with dementia
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Describe a person-centred approach
●  Take part in a role-play activity, demonstrating how to respond to a patient living with dementia whilst practising a person-centred approach.
Introduction to dementia
Before you can effectively work with people with dementia, you need a basic understanding of the condition. Dementia is a collection of symptoms, which are caused by disorders affecting the brain. These things affect our behaviour, thinking and ability to carry out everyday tasks.
It is a common condition associated with ageing (over 65s), but it is not necessarily something that is inevitable and can materialise earlier in life, possibly in their 40s and 50s.
The most common types of dementia are:
● Alzheimer's disease
● Huntington's disease
● Pick's disease (Fronto Temporal Lobar Degeneration (FTLD))
● Vascular dementia
Other less common types of dementia are:
● Parkinson's disease
● Dementia with Lewy bodies
● Alcohol-related dementia (Korsakoff's syndrome)
● Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease.
Alzheimer's disease
This is the most common cause of dementia, where there is a gradual and progressive loss of brain cells. The problem is that the precise cause of this is unknown – still there are certain things that may increase the likelihood of developing Alzheimer's.
● Getting older
● Family history of the condition
● Severe head injuries (in the past)
● Vascular disease-related conditions and lifestyle factors.
As the condition is progressive, the symptoms will increase with time. Early indicators include:
● Minor memory problems
● Difficulty saying the right words.
As the condition worsens, the following symptoms may present:
● Disorientation
● Personality changes
● Behavioural changes.
When trying to diagnose the condition, there is no single test – the GP will ask questions about the problems the person is experiencing and conduct some basic tests to rule out other conditions. If there is a suspicion of Alzheimer's, there should be a referral to a specialist.
Treatment of the condition involves medication to slow down its onset; however, there is no cure. The most suitable option is to arrange a care plan to provide support for those affected.
There are several steps you can take which may help delay the onset of dementia, such as:
● Quitting smoking and cutting down on alcohol
● Eating a healthy balanced diet
● Having regular health tests as you get older
● Staying physically fit and mentally active.
Pathological features of Alzheimer's
The typical neuropathological signs of Alzheimer's are amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles – these are brain abnormalities that define the disease. These two signs are required to be present in the brain tissue for a definitive diagnosis of Alzheimer's, regardless of the other symptoms. The appearance of these can precede any behavioural symptoms by years.
However, their main effect is the loss of connection between cells and cell death.
Amyloid plaques
These are dense, insoluble clumps of protein that deposit a damaging substance around the nerve cells of the brain. In Alzheimer's these plaques are common in the hippocampus, which is responsible for memory (including spatial awareness). This explains why people with Alzheimer's have trouble recalling short-term memories and get lost when they wander.
Neurofibrillary tangles
These are insoluble twisted fibers that clog the brain from the inside. Brain nerve cells (neurons) transfer information, nutrients, and molecules through microtubules – a protein called tau is responsible for stabilizing the microtubules. In Alzheimer's, the tau becomes tangled, and the microtubules consequently disintegrate. Therefore, information can't be transmitted, causing memory loss.
Loss of connection between cells and cell death
The loss of connection between cells and eventual death of cells responsible for memory, learning, and communication affect the respective functions. When these neurons' communication paths are damaged, they cannot function efficiently and can eventually die altogether. This causes brain atrophy, as the affected regions of the brain shrink when cells
waste away – a progressive process that results in significant shrinkage of brain tissue in the final stage of Alzheimer's disease.
Huntington's disease
This is a genetic condition that damages specific nerve cells in the brain, causing a progressive loss of function for the affected areas of the brain.
The things it can affect are:
● Movement
● Cognition
● Behaviour.
The early symptoms are things such as:
● Personality changes
●  Mood swings
●  Unusual behavior.
It can sometimes be recognised by involuntary movements; while it is inherited, there is no family history in about three percent of cases.
Again, there is no cure for Huntington's; however, the process cannot be slowed down or reversed either. The only provisions that can be made are to improve or maintain the daily life skills that may be affected by the condition.
The types of things that can help are:
●  Medication to help with excessive movement/irritability
● Speech/language therapy
●  Occupational therapy
●  Family support for choosing care plan.
Once the condition has developed, it will progress and worsen until the person dies after 10-20 years. In the latter stages, the person will become completely dependent on care and require full-time care. The actual death will come from another cause usually, such as pneumonia, heart failure, or infection.
The symptoms will usually present in adulthood and can affect men and women – with 90 percent of cases presenting at this stage in life.
Pick's disease (Fronto Temporal Lobar Degeneration (FTLD))
This is quite a rare form of dementia (accounting for only five percent of progressive dementia cases) – excess protein build-up causes shrinkage of brain cells. It affects the frontal and temporal lobes of the brain – these areas control speech and personality; as such, the noticeable effects are personality and behavioral changes, as well as a decline in the ability to speak coherently.
The accumulation of these abnormal brain cells known as Pick's bodies is the cause of character changes, poor decision making, intellectual, memory, and speech impairment, and socially unacceptable behavior. The most common onset is between 40 and 60 years of age – it also occurs more commonly in women. The cause is unknown, but a few studies suggest it may have a genetic component.
Symptoms are behavioral, emotional, language, and physical.
Behavioral symptoms:
● Losing their inhibitions
● Losing interest in people and things
● Losing sympathy or empathy
● Showing compulsive behaviors
● Craving sweet or fatty foods/alcohol and cigarettes.
Emotional symptoms:
● Abrupt mood changes
● Coldness in character (lack of empathy)
● Apathy
● Impatience and rudeness
● Poor attention span
● Unaware of behavioral changes.
Language symptoms:
● Slow, hesitant speech/stutters
● Grammar errors
● Understanding of complex sentences diminishes (but not single words)
● Asking the meaning of familiar words
●  Trouble finding the right word, leading to less precise descriptions instead or using generalized words such as 'person' instead of 'husband'
● Difficulty recognizing familiar people or objects.
Physical symptoms:
● Lack of coordination
● Movement difficulties
● Increased muscle stiffness and rigidity
● Memory loss
● Incontinence
● Weakness (in general).
Treatment options
While there is no cause, there can be lifestyle adaptations to help cope with the symptoms:
● Sensory function aids – hearing aids, eyeglasses
● Behaviour modifications – have positive behavior reward systems to reinforce desired behaviors
● Therapy – speech/occupational therapy to improve communication and movement
●  Medication – selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are antidepressants that offer temporary relief to apathy and depression symptoms; other things they can reduce are food cravings, compulsive behavior and cause an increase in impulse control.
Vascular dementia
This is a common form of dementia and is caused by the gradual death of brain cells – this causes a loss of mental ability. Vascular dementia is caused by an inhibited blood flow to the brain due to problems with the blood cells that supply it.
If this type of dementia is caught early, the brain deterioration can be stopped – this stage is referred to as 'vascular cognitive impairment'.
The symptoms include:
● Slowness of thought
● Difficulty with planning
● Memory loss
● Trouble with language
● Mood or behavioral changes.
Any of these symptoms indicate brain damage and require urgent medical assessment by a GP.
The causes of vascular dementia are blockage and narrowing of blood vessels inside the brain. It is also caused by the inheriting of genes from parents and can run in parents. High blood
pressure can also cause it and worsen the effects. Therefore, managing blood pressure, losing excess weight, and quitting smoking are methods of reducing the risk of development or slowing its progression.
It usually starts before the age of 75 and is more common in men, especially Asian and Black Caribbean people.
Identifying dementia
Dementia is easily mistaken, due to the similarity of some of its symptoms with other conditions. Some of these symptoms include:
● Vitamin and hormone deficiencies
● Depression
● Medication clashes/overmedication
● Infections and brain tumours.
An early medical diagnosis can result in better treatment options for treatable conditions; if dementia is diagnosed, it can mean better support, information, and medication for the person affected.
General signs of dementia
Early dementia signs are not overly obvious. Common symptoms may include:
● Gradual and frequent memory loss
● Confusion
● Changes in personality
● Apathy/withdrawal
● Loss of ability to perform everyday tasks.
Dementia support
As well as medication, there are other support systems in place for dementia systems:
● Families
● Friends
● Carers.
Advances/current research
There have been many advances in Alzheimer's research since the G8 decided to combine global efforts to combat the disease.
Below is a summary of the major findings from 2013:
●  Changes in the brain due to Alzheimer's can begin a decade or more before symptoms appear – therefore treatments may need to begin in the very early stages of dementia to be effective. This is what clinical trials are now focusing on – patients with mild to moderate dementia symptoms, with a variety of drugs
●  Tracers such as Amyvid and Vizamyl can be injected that binds to beta-amyloid, to reveal the presence of amyloid plaques on a standard PET scan. This is an improvement on the previous method which only allowed an estimate of amyloid in the brain. There are also tracers for Tau, another protein that accumulates in the brains of people with Alzheimer's. The amount of tracer in the brain correlates with the severity of the dementia symptoms
●  Eleven new genes were discovered in October 2013 that increase the risk of developing Alzheimer's, which means the total number of genes related to Alzheimer's development is now 20. The newly identified genes have a small effect on the risk of Alzheimer's by themselves, making them ineffective for identifying people at risk. The main use of their discovery lies in identifying new processes linked to the disease and directing future research and drug development
●  Providing training courses for carers can reduce depression and improve their quality of life, as they better understand the behaviour of patients with dementia and are taught coping and relaxation strategies. For this to become more commonplace, more attention needs to be given to psychological intervention, as opposed to the
current major focus on drugs
●  Future investment will be focused on prevention research and intervening with people showing signs of the disease on brain scans but no symptoms. There will also be $21.7 million funding by the government for research into the causes and prevention of the condition, and an improvement in the processes of caring for people with dementia. There are presently 321,000 Australians with dementia – this will increase to 900,000 by 2050.
Progression of dementia
All types and variations of dementia are progressive, with the brain's structure and chemistry becoming ever more damaged over time. This results in a decreased ability to remember, understand and communicate with others.
It is worth noting that, while most dementia cases are progressive, some are reversible – this can happen if there is a nutritional deficiency, an infection, a side effect from medication, or
brain bleeding. If the underlying cause is treated in these cases, then the symptoms of dementia can be stopped.
The speed of the progression can vary greatly between individuals, and the experience will also differ according to things such as physical condition, emotional resilience, and support networks available.
Professionals use the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) to evaluate the progression of symptoms in people with dementia – it has five stages that describe the patient's ability to perform in orientation, memory, judgment, home and hobbies, personal care, and community.
The stages are as follows:
As there is no known cure for dementia, often the best way of managing the
condition is through support systems and offering a stable and familiar environment for the person affected.
This type of approach to care focuses on viewing each patient with dementia as an individual, as opposed to the abilities they have lost/the effects of their condition. Good care personnel follows this approach with all patients – viewing them as individuals with defining characteristics and uniqueness. You should not view the person as a combination of symptoms and behaviors,
i.e. something to be controlled. If you can hone in on the individual interests, needs, preferences, qualities, and abilities, you can deliver a much more personal and tailored service. Other considerations include treating people suffering from dementia with respect and dignity.
Care homes that practice person-centered care are aiming to make the experience of each person with dementia who lives there. The mission statement of the home should reflect this concept – therefore, this philosophy will be ingrained in the staff and standards will be measured against compliance with it.
For example, if a resident with dementia makes repeated requests to see a specific relative or to go home, a person-centered approach would attempt to respond to these needs and accommodate them, as well as acknowledge emotional needs of insecurity.
Brooker (2007) uses the acronym VIPS to summarise the meaning of person-centered care:
●  Valued – the person with dementia and their carers must feel valued
● Individuals – they must be treated as individuals
● Perspective – use the perspective of the person with dementia to understand their needs
● Social – the person's social environment must be positive and relationships maintained.
Activity 1A
1.2 – Interpret individualized plan and familiarise self with the specific needs and wants of the person living with dementia
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
● Provide examples of information which can be found in an individualized plan
●  Give examples of how to help someone with dementia maintain a good quality of life
● Interpret a care plan and highlight specified information
●  Summarise the specific needs of a person from a care plan provided.

1.4 – Recognise signs consistent with financial, physical, or emotional abuse or neglect of the person and report to an appropriate person
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
● Outline how to appropriately respond to an older person being violated
● Define elderly abuse
●  Identify two signs that may indicate abuse in a range of areas
● Follow proper reporting procedures in response to suspected financial exploitation.
Defining elderly abuse
Elderly people may be abused in their own homes, in care facilities, or in relatives' homes. Elderly abuse is any instance where someone takes advantage of an elderly person.
It can include:
●  Financial exploitation – this is the unauthorized use of an older person's money or their property by either a caregiver or an external party


Questions:
1. Describe the person-centered approach including what Brooker’s (2007) acronym VIPS stands for.
*
2. What can you find out from an individualised plan or care plan? Give four examples of items in a care plan.
*
3. Give three examples of how you could help someone with dementia maintain a good quality of life.
*
4.    Read this plan and highlight any areas that relate to the following information
 Person’s medical needs                                                   
 Person’s behavioural patterns                                       
 Information about the person’s routine.
Mrs. Johnson is a 79-year-old lady who has been managed for Alzheimer's dementia with a variety of nonpharmacologic management strategies such as promoting a clear household routine, timed toileting, pet therapy, and other strategies to provide structure. However, she was finally started on donepezil 10 mg daily at bedtime to try and maximize cognitive function and memory. When following up for medication tolerance and adverse effects, the PMHNP recognizes that the most common patient complaints include: Constipation and dry mouth, Nausea and diarrhea, Palpitations and anxiety, Nocturnal awakenings. Interpret the information you have identified, and, in 100-200 words, summarise this information into a short written overview.
*
5. From the care plan you read in question 4, summarise, in your own words, any specific needs and wants of the person that you can interpret. Explain how you interpreted this. Your total answer should be no more than 400 words.
*
6. Why is it important to maintain a stable environment for people with dementia?
*
7. How can you identify a person’s needs for a stable and familiar environment?
*
8. Address the needs for a stable and familiar environment for one person to whom you provide care and support. Write a brief 200-300 word report which outlines the following information
 The specific needs of the person
 The environment of the person            
 How you addressed the need for familiarity and stability 
 How and why you addressed the person’s needs in the way you did.
*
9. How would you respond if you witnessed or knew an older person's rights were being violated?
*
10. Define elderly abuse.
*
11. For each of the following categories of elderly abuse, identify two signs that may indicate abuse in this area.
 General abuse     
 Physical abuse     
 Emotional abuse     
 Sexual abuse      
 Neglect                          
 Financial exploitation   
 Healthcare fraud.