Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
2. Use appropriate communication strategies
2.1 Use verbal and non-verbal communication strategies to maximize engagement of the person with dementia
2.2 Gain cooperation and provide reassurance as appropriate by using reality orientation
2.3 Use a range of validation strategies to relieve distress and agitation in the person
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills) that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
● Provided support to 2 different people living with dementia:
○ using a person-centered approach to support
○  using appropriate communication strategies
○  assisting in implementing a range of suitable activities that meet the person’s needs.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
●  Up to date research on dementia and the different manifestations of dementia, including
○  Alzheimer’s disease
○ vascular dementia or multi-infarct dementia
○  Lewy bodies
○ excessive alcohol intake or Korsakov Syndrome
○ fronto temporal lobar degeneration (FLTD) including Pick’s disease
○ Huntington’s disease
○  Parkinson’s disease
○ younger onset dementia
● Dementia as a progressive neurological condition, including pathological features:
○ amyloid plaques
○  neurofibrillary tangles
○  loss of connection between cells and cell death
●  Common indicators and symptoms of dementia
●  Behaviours of concern, needs driven behaviour model and de-escalation procedures
●  Progression of dementia and potential impact on the person with dementia, their family and significant others, including:
○  depression
○  loss and grieving
○  anger
○  despair
○  social embarrassment a family member might feel
○  isolation
○  financial burden on the family
○  social devaluation
●  Principles of person-centred approach to support
●  Relevant activities which enhance self-esteem and pleasure in the person’s life, minimise boredom, and distract from or eliminate behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia
●  Competency and image enhancement as a means of addressing devaluation
●  Verbal and non-verbal communication strategies including:
○  reality orientation
○  reminders of the day, the time, relationships, occasions
○  reassuring words, phrases and body language
○  validation
○  empathy
○  acceptance of the person’s reality
○  acknowledgement
○  allowing expressions of distress
○  providing verbal and physical reassurance
○  frequent reminiscence to connect with person.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in an ageing support workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. These are situations relating to an emergency or unplanned procedures where assessment in these circumstances would be unsafe, impractical or threaten the dignity of the older person.
The following conditions must be met for this unit:
●  Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including individualised plans and any relevant equipment outlined in the plan
●  Modelling of industry operating conditions, including scenarios that reflect a range of dementia support services involving a range of dementia symptoms and behaviours of concern
Overall, assessment must involve some real interactions with people with dementia, colleagues and families/carers.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - http://www.cshisc.com.au
2. Use appropriate communication strategies
2.1. Use verbal and non-verbal communication strategies to maximize engagement of the person with dementia
2.2. Gain cooperation and provide reassurance as appropriate by using reality orientation
2.3. Use a range of validation strategies to relieve distress and agitation in the person
2.1 – Use verbal and non-verbal communication strategies to maximize engagement of the person with dementia
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Explain what active/empathic listening is and how it can be used to help care for people with dementia
●  Demonstrate their ability to use verbal and non-verbal communication during two interactions and reflect on these interactions in a report.
Engage people with dementia
Engaging people with dementia in communication is important for mentally stimulating them – again, you should treat them like normal and engage them with respect and dignity.
Encouraging communication
● Make eye contact whenever you are communicating with them
● Short, simple statements
● Speak slowly and clearly
● Be patient with them for responses
● Don't interrupt them or try to finish their sentences
● Encourage them to join in conversations with others
● Don't speak on behalf of the person – especially during conversations about decision-making. This is demeaning
● Don't patronize/ridicule them
●  Don't dismiss what they say, even if it is irrelevant to the current conversation
● Keep choices and decisions as simple as possible
●  If they don't appear to understand you, rephrase what you say or utilize different communication strategies, e.g. visual communication.
Body language/contact
● Gentle touch
● Using a friendly and positive tone
● Not standing too close/invading their personal space when talking to them.
Empathic/active listening
Empathic/active listening is a form of communicating that requires the listener to feedback what they hear to the speaker, by way of restating or paraphrasing what they have heard in their own words. This helps both the counsellor and client clarify and confirm what is being communicated. Empathic/active listening is the most effective form of communication between counsellor and client – it is functional, mechanical and leaves little room for assumptions/interpretation. Feedback shows understanding and involves both verbal and non- verbal communication.
When a counsellor is listening to the words being spoken by the client, they are also taking note of the way the words are being spoken. Often, clients can find it difficult to express their feelings in words and non-verbal cues can express a client’s feelings more effectively. When a counsellor communicates through active listening, it shows respect for the client and validates their worth. This enhances the client's self-esteem which, in turn, enables the
client to relax and means they are less likely to put up defensive barriers.
OARS skills (open-ended questions, affirmations, reflections, summaries) are one example of empathic listening skills because they are all about listening in a heartfelt manner without trying to change or push the individual. These OARS skills come from a therapy called Motivational Interviewing, developed by Professor William R Miller.
Activity 2A
2.2 – Gain cooperation and provide reassurance as appropriate by using reality orientation
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Create a plan for a reality orientation session, detailing what skills it aims to develop and who needs to be involved, as well as materials, required to
● Take part in a, role-play activity, demonstrating the implementation of reality orientation behavior through speech and activities.
Reality orientation therapy
As well as knowing the way you should communicate, the context and context of what you communicate is equally important. These sorts of things help orientate themselves in reality and remain connected with the rest of the world.
Things you should regularly communicate include:
● Reminders of the day, the time, relationships, occasions
● Reassuring words, phrases, and body language.
Reality orientation is a type of therapy that improves self-esteem, by reducing mental disorientation, memory loss, and confusion. It can involve group work and sessions where information such as the current date and day; the location of the room they are in; the names of everyone in the room are displayed on a whiteboard. In addition to this, the group then complete tasks aimed at providing mental stimulation. They will also reinforce the information displayed on the board.
The activities include things like:
● Discussions/debates
● Word games
● Memory games.
Reassuring words, phrases, and body language
Using positive words, phrases, and body language can encourage the person with dementia to communicate more openly and feel safer and comfortable in their environment.
Examples of reassuring words, phrases, and body language include:
● Praise
● Jokes (not at their expense)
● Facing them when you talk to them
● Smiling
● Maintaining eye contact.
Activity 2B
2.3 – Use a range of validation strategies to relieve distress and agitation in the person
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Write a script between a person living with dementia and their carer that continues from the given prompt, demonstrating an example of a carer using a range of validation strategies to relieve distress and agitation in the person.
Validation therapy
This works by accepting the values, beliefs, and reality that the person with dementia believes. Rather than disagree or tell them that they are wrong, you should agree with what they suggest but then get them to agree to something else without them realizing they have been redirected from their original line of thought.
The techniques and methods it includes are:
● Empathy
● Acceptance of the person's reality
● Acknowledgement
● Allowing expressions of distress
● Providing verbal and/or physical reassurance
● Use reminiscences frequently to connect with clients.
Benefits of validation therapy:
● Not confrontational
● No-one is told off
● No-one is shouted at
● No-one is told they are wrong.
Disadvantages of validation therapy:
● It promotes lies
● Can be difficult for caregivers and families to lie.
Case study – Validation therapy
Chloe is an 85-year-old woman with severe dementia, living in a residential
care home. Her husband, Andrew died five years ago; however, she has the following panicked conversation with her carer:
Chloe: "I need to call Andrew!"
Carer: "Ok. You need to call Andrew?"
Chloe: "Yes, I need to remind him to get milk!" Carer: "You're out of milk?"
Chloe: "Yes, I need it for cereal and tea tomorrow when my friends come round."
Carer: "You drink a lot of tea, don't you?"
Chloe: "Yes, I have about three cups a day. I also like coffee – it helps me stay awake during the day."
Carer: "I could go for a coffee right now actually, and was just about to make one. Do you want a cup?"
Chloe: "Oh, yes... I am, feeling a bit drowsy."
Notice here how the carer never mentions that Andrew is dead and redirects Chloe subtly away from the phone, to milk, and then to coffee. By this time, Chloe has forgotten about calling Andrew at all.
Reminiscence therapy
This is where people suffering from dementia are encouraged to recall memories from their distant past – it can prove therapeutic and enjoyable for them. In therapy, they meet with a group and share their stories – as well as being helpful to their emotional health it provides social stimulation and boosts their self-esteem. It can also help them resolve thoughts from their past and connect them to the present.
Note that sufferers of dementia usually only have problems with their short-term memory, which can lead to confusion, lack of confidence, and feelings of vulnerability.
In a session, the therapist will encourage everyone to share their stories and use memorable items such as photos, music, and postcards to trigger people's memories. Individual sessions can also happen if there is enough evidence to compile a 'life book'. Sessions usually last between 30 and 60 minutes.

Questions:
1. What is active/empathic listening and how can it be used to help care for people with dementia?
*
2. Create a plan for a reality orientation session. Detail what skills it aims to develop and who needs to be involved, as well as materials required.
*
3. Write a script between a person living with dementia and their carer that continues from the given prompt. The script should demonstrate an example of a carer using a range of validation strategies to relieve distress and agitation in the person. Write your script as a continuation of the below dialogue between Chloe, 85-years-old, and her carer. Your script should be no more than eight additional lines of dialogue. Script prompt: Chloe (Visibly distressed and agitated): Where’s my bag? I need my bag Carer. Your bag is missing?
