Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to provide person-centered care and support to people living with dementia. It involves following and contributing to an established individual plan.
This unit applies to workers in a residential or community context, including family homes. Work performed requires some discretion and judgment and may be carried out under regular direct or indirect supervision.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards, and industry codes of practice.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
3. Provide activities for maintenance of dignity, skills and health
3.1 Organise activities which aim to maintain independence, using familiar routines and existing skills
3.2 Organise activities that are appropriate to the individual, reflecting their cultural likes and dislikes, in order to bring back pleasurable memories
3.3 Ensure the safety and comfort of the person balanced with autonomy and risk-taking
3.4 Access information about the person’s reminiscences and routines with family and carers
3.5 Provide support and guidance to family, carers and/or significant others where appropriate
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills) that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
●  Provided support to 2 different people living with dementia:
○  using a person-centered approach to support
○  using appropriate communication strategies
○  assisting in implementing a range of suitable activities that meet the person’s needs.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
●  Up to date research on dementia and the different manifestations of dementia, including:
○  Alzheimer’s disease
○  vascular dementia or multi-infarct dementia
○  Lewy bodies
○  excessive alcohol intake or Korsakov Syndrome
○  fronto temporal lobar degeneration (FLTD) including Pick’s disease
○  Huntington’s disease
○  Parkinson’s disease
○  younger onset dementia
●  Dementia as a progressive neurological condition, including pathological features:
○  amyloid plaques
○  neurofibrillary tangles
○  loss of connection between cells and cell death
●  Common indicators and symptoms of dementia
●  Behaviours of concern, needs driven behaviour model and de-escalation procedures
●  Progression of dementia and potential impact on the person with dementia, their family and significant others, including:
○  depression
○  loss and grieving
○  anger
○  despair
○  social embarrassment a family member might feel
○  isolation
○  financial burden on the family
○  social devaluation
●  Principles of person-centred approach to support
●  Relevant activities which enhance self-esteem and pleasure in the person’s life, minimise boredom, and distract from or eliminate behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia
●  Competency and image enhancement as a means of addressing devaluation
●  Verbal and non-verbal communication strategies including:
○  reality orientation
○  reminders of the day, the time, relationships, occasions
○  reassuring words, phrases and body language
○  validation
○  empathy
○  acceptance of the person’s reality
○  acknowledgement
○  allowing expressions of distress
○  providing verbal and physical reassurance
○  frequent reminiscence to connect with person.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in an ageing support workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. These are situations relating to an emergency or unplanned procedures where assessment in these circumstances would be unsafe, impractical or threaten the dignity of the older person.
The following conditions must be met for this unit:
●  Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including individualised plans and any relevant equipment outlined in the plan
●  Modelling of industry operating conditions, including scenarios that reflect a range of dementia support services involving a range of dementia symptoms and behaviours of concern
Overall, assessment must involve some real interactions with people with dementia, colleagues and families/carers.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - http://www.cshisc.com.au
3. Provide activities for maintenance of dignity, skills, and health
3.1. Organize activities that aim to maintain independence, using familiar routines and existing skills
3.2. Organize activities that are appropriate to the individual, reflecting their cultural likes and dislikes, in order to bring back pleasurable memories
3.3. Ensure the safety and comfort of the person balanced with autonomy and risk-taking
3.4.  Access information about the person’s reminiscences and routines with family and carers
3.5.  Provide support and guidance to family, carers, and/or significant others where appropriate
3.1 - Organise activities which aim to maintain independence, using familiar routines and existing skills
3.2 - Organise activities that are appropriate to the individual, reflecting their cultural likes and dislikes, in order to bring back pleasurable memories
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Create a plan to organise an activity which aims to maintain independence using familiar routines and existing skills
●  Create a plan to organize an activity that is appropriate to an individual, reflecting their cultural likes and dislikes, in order to bring back pleasurable memories.
Organize activities to maintain independence
It is important for people with dementia to maintain their independence if this is possible. These can be simple, routine things such as:
● Maintaining personal safety
●  Communication (speech, writing, non-verbal communication)
● Eating and drinking
●  Mobilising and transferring (moving from place to place and position to position)
●  Attending to personal hygiene (bathing, laundering personal linen)
● Dressing and undressing
●  Attending own spiritual needs
● Grooming
● Expressing sexuality
●  Accessing financial resources and allowances
●  Paying bills and regular outgoings
● Shopping
● Preparing meals
● Climbing stairs
●  Maintaining household (cleaning, laundry, décor, repairs)
●  Travelling by private and public transport
●  Interacting with others and socializing
●  Accessing leisure, recreational and sporting activities
●  Recreational and sporting activities
●  Craft and creative activities
● Reminiscing activities.
The extent to which they will need assistance with these activities can vary between individuals – you will need to research and find out their preferences. This can be done by asking them directly or finding out through family, friends, advocates, and health professionals.
You need to determine their current skill levels and their physical and mental ability. The types of skills/abilities you are looking out for include:
● General mobility
● Memory
●  Ability to use stairs
● Coordination
●  Senses (sight, hearing, etc.)
● Strength.
Needs and preferences can be determined by:
●  Aged Care service provider assessments
●  Aged Care Assessment Team (ACAT) assessments.
Activities for pleasure and reminiscence
Modified from: Alzheimer’s Society (https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/documents_info.php?documentID=115) Access date: 28/10/16.
We have discussed a range of activities that a person may engage in to increase their independence. However, it is also important to engage the client in activities that bring them pleasure.
These may include:
● Creative activities
● Games
● Music
● Outdoors activities.
The choice of activity will depend upon the client and their personal preferences likes and dislikes. You will need to work collaboratively with them to determine which activities are most enjoyable for them.
Reminiscence
People with dementia can often find the distant past easier to remember than recent events. For this reason, it can bring them the pleasure to engage in activities that incorporate the memory of past times.
These types of activities may include:
●  Talking about the past and fond memories
●  Looking at photo albums, home movies, etc.
●  Visits to familiar places
●  Looking at books, photos, or online to reminisce about major events in the lifetime of the individual, e.g. the moon landing.
You should be prepared for clients to become emotional when reminiscing about the past. To try and ensure that these activities are as enjoyable as possible, avoid pressing your clients for facts and precise details that they might not remember; rather, allow them to enjoy the feelings the memories bring.
Activity 3A
3.3 – Ensure the safety and comfort of the person balanced with autonomy and risk-taking
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
➢ Identify common risks associated with people living with dementia
➢ Write an essay which discusses how the safety and comfort of an individual can be ensured in way that is balanced with autonomy and risk-taking.
Common risks
Whatever activities you organise and carry out, the safety and comfort of clients should be at the forefront of your mind.
There are a number of common risks associated with people with dementia, including
➢ Ability to find their own way
➢ Ability to negotiate traffic
➢ Wandering or other behaviours relating to agitation
➢ Behaviours relating to psychotic experiences or mood disorders
➢ Ability to safely prepare, cook and store food and drink
➢ Ability to control the temperature of water
➢ Ability to use home appliances
➢ Ability to maintain personal and home security
➢ Ability to manage own finances
➢ Ability to recognise dangers in their environment
➢ Ability to recognise the safety of others.
Activities must be planned with consideration of these factors – where they cannot perform certain tasks unassisted, the appropriate help will need to be provided. Think also about hazard assessment – sharp objects, uneven terrain, chemicals, electrical outlets, and fire risks. If there are any safety issues, think about what measures can be put in place to prevent/minimise the risk of harm.
Dignity of risk
‘Dignity of risk’ is a term used to describe a person’s right to make their own decisions, even if this presents a level of risk.
People with dementia are vulnerable to risk, but it is also important to preserve their independence and autonomy. This can present a dilemma for a carer trying to balance their duty of care – a professional responsibility to keep a person safe – with the principle of dignity of risk.
A middle ground is to accept a person’s decisions, but to take responsibility for supporting the person to carry out those decisions as safely as possible. For example, Elizabeth Lodge in Kings Cross, Sydney, has taken to providing residents with GPS watches, so that they can go for walks alone, but the staff can know where they are at all times.
Source: Journal of Dementia Care, March 25, 2017, http://journalofdementiacare.com/taking-the-risk-
dementia/ (14/06/17)
With creativity and clever thinking, it can be possible to increase the independence of people living with dementia by managing the risks that their choices may present.
Adaptive technology, assistive equipment, and careful monitoring are all things that can be employed to help a person remain independent and autonomous by reducing the risk of injury or harm.
Activity 3B
3.4 – Access information about the person’s reminiscences and routines with family and carers
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
➢ Take part in a role-play activity, demonstrating the ability to access information about an individual living with dementia from their relatives.
Learning their life story
When trying to design activities around someone's cultural likes and dislikes, it helps to have an idea about their life history. This is because the activities people carry out are often linked to their social identity and roles – as dementia can cause people to forget these, activities that remind them of their roles are useful and enjoyable. Their experiences from the past shaped who they are today – keeping hold of these is important in keeping a person 'who they are'.
The types of information you need to find out are:
➢ Previous jobs
➢ Domestic interests
➢ Recreational pastimes
➢ Religious views
➢ Family members
➢ Family history
➢ Homes and neighborhoods
➢ Nationality and countries of residence.
This information can come from friends, family, or past neighbours – treat it as confidential within the workplace. It will need to be shared with staff to help them plan activities and understand how to interact with individuals. The idea is to find out how the person lived before they were in residential care/diagnosed with dementia – you want to try and recreate this environment for familiarity purposes.
Using their life story to plan activities
As we've already discussed, activities should be, wherever possible, based upon the life experiences and interests of the patients.
So, for example, if you find out that they used to work in a food preparation, you can base activities on this – have them prepare and cook basic meals in an activity kitchen; involve them in baking; involve them in a local cookery class.
Email: admin@blocklearning.com.au
Phone: 02 8526 4555
Also, consider their routine – if you can keep them in the same routines they were used to before dementia, it will increase the likelihood of them remembering those days. The structure will also keep their mind engaged. Knowing their routine will also allow easier identification of abnormal behaviour patterns and routines.
Activity 3C
3.5 - Provide support and guidance to family, carers and/or significant others where appropriate
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
➢ Identify different problems which can affect carers, family or significant others
➢ Give examples of support and guidance which can be provided to the daughter of a person living with dementia.
Providing support and guidance
All of those working with people with dementia and those closely related to the person affected should have an understanding of the disease, its effects and the basic methods of effective care provision.
While caring can be a rewarding role, it inevitably comes with a burden of responsibility for the wellbeing of others. The types of problems associated with caring include:
➢ Depression
➢ Physical exhaustion
➢ Emotional exhaustion
➢ Social isolation
➢ Financial hardship
➢ Resentment.
An education on the condition and how to effectively can help in reducing the onset of some of the above effects – simply understanding something can often make it easier to accept the negative aspects of it.
To provide support and guidance to family, carers and/or significant others, you may:
➢ Direct them to local support groups
➢ Provide information and advice on caring
➢ Recommend adaptions that can be made to the environment and equipment
➢ Provide information on local authority support, such as respite care, day centres and counselling for carers
➢ Give self-care advice and information.
Caring for someone with dementia
While all care needs will be individual to a degree – there are some general standards that you can base things off. For example, the average care needs of someone with dementia living at home are around 35 hours of informal care a week.
The types of things people may need help with/ include:
➢ Bathing
➢ Dressing
➢ Sleep disturbances
➢ Emotional support
➢ Paying bills
➢ Cooking meals
➢ Household chores
The stress of the demands of caring for someone with dementia is often greater than in other types of care. Carers should have access to psychological therapies, such a cognitive behavioural therapy – 52 per cent of carers for dementia are not getting adequate support.
Financial implications
For family carers, the financial burdens of looking after someone with dementia can be huge – they often have to use private savings and assets. Thirty-five per cent of carers for people with dementia say they have trouble meeting monetary demands of care, according to a survey by Alzheimer's Australia SA.
The demands can include the following:
➢ Transport costs
➢ Utility costs
➢ Care costs
➢ Giving up/reducing work to care for someone
➢ Inadequate benefits.
Support and guidance available
There are many support networks that can provide information and guidance for family carers and significant others, such as Alzheimer's Australia.
For more information see www.fightdementia.org.au.
Understanding behavioural changes
Some notable changes in behaviour of people with dementia include:
➢ Aggression
➢ Agitation
➢ Anxiety
➢ Depression
➢ Disinhibited behaviour
➢ Hallucinations/falsifications
➢ Wandering
➢ 'Sundowning' (restless in afternoon and evening).
First, you need to try and understand the cause of the behaviour if before you can understand it – look for any triggers or external factors. Once this is identified, it can be a lot easier to prevent or control the behaviour. If it is caused by an external trigger, you can prevent exposure to this situation; if it is down to chemical processes in the brain, medication may help inhibit this.
If you keep a record of any problems, noting the situational factors, it can make it easier to figure out the cause. The four possible causes you should be including are:
➢ Health – medication, impaired senses, illness (acute and chronic), dehydration, constipation, depression, fatigue, discomfort
➢ The environment – overwhelming, cluttered, overly stimulating, confusing (if too contrasting), changing routines, unfamiliar environment
➢ The activity – too difficult, unfamiliar, poor communication.

Questions:
1. From the individualised plan of one of the people that you work with, create a plan to organise an activity which aims to maintain independence, using familiar routines and existing skills. If you do not have access to an individualised plan at this stage, one will be provided for you. In your plan, outline your proposed activity and any resources or support that you will need. Provide an explanation for why you have proposed your suggested activity based on the individualised plan.
*
2. From the individualised plan of one of the people that you work with, create a plan to organise an activity that is appropriate to the individual, reflecting their cultural like and dislikes, in order to bring back pleasurable memories. If you do not have access to an individualised plan at this stage, one will be provided for you. In your plan, outline your proposed activity and any resources or support that you will need. Provide an explanation for why you have proposed your suggested activity based on the individualised plan.
*
3. What are some of the common risks associated with people living with dementia?
*
4. Beverley is an 87-year-old person living with dementia. She has always loved to cook, but is now unsteady on her feet and has a short attention span. Write a brief essay (200-300 words) that discusses how the safety and comfort of Beverley can be ensured in a way that is balanced with autonomy and risk-taking.
*
5. What kinds of problems can affect carers, family or significant others? Give three examples.
*
6. The daughter of a person living with dementia is their primary carer. She is physically and emotionally exhausted from her role.Give three examples of support and guidance you can provide. Where applicable, reference specific local or organisational sources of support.