This unit applies to workers in a residential or community context, including family homes. Work performed requires some discretion and judgment and may be carried out under regular direct or indirect supervision.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards, and industry codes of practice.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
4. Implement strategies which minimise the impact of behaviours of concern
4.1 Identify behaviours of concern and potential triggers
4.2 Contribute to team discussions on support planning and review
4.3 Take action to minimise the likelihood of and reduce the impact of behaviours on the person and others
4.4 Evaluate implemented strategies with the support planning team to ensure effectiveness in minimising behaviours
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills) that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
●  Provided support to 2 different people living with dementia:
○  using a person-centered approach to support
○  using appropriate communication strategies
○  assisting in implementing a range of suitable activities that meet the person’s needs.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
●  Up to date research on dementia and the different manifestations of dementia, including:
○  Alzheimer’s disease
○  vascular dementia or multi-infarct dementia
○  Lewy bodies
○  excessive alcohol intake or Korsakov Syndrome
○  fronto temporal lobar degeneration (FLTD) including Pick’s disease
○  Huntington’s disease
○  Parkinson’s disease
○  younger onset dementia
●  Dementia as a progressive neurological condition, including pathological features:
○  amyloid plaques
○  neurofibrillary tangles
○  loss of connection between cells and cell death
●  Common indicators and symptoms of dementia
●  Behaviours of concern, needs driven behaviour model and de-escalation procedures
●  Progression of dementia and potential impact on the person with dementia, their family and significant others, including:
○  depression
○  loss and grieving
○  anger
○  despair
○  social embarrassment a family member might feel
○  isolation
○  financial burden on the family
○  social devaluation
●  Principles of person-centred approach to support
●  Relevant activities which enhance self-esteem and pleasure in the person’s life, minimise boredom, and distract from or eliminate behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia
●  Competency and image enhancement as a means of addressing devaluation
●  Verbal and non-verbal communication strategies including:
○  reality orientation
○  reminders of the day, the time, relationships, occasions
○  reassuring words, phrases and body language
○  validation
○  empathy
○  acceptance of the person’s reality
○  acknowledgement
○  allowing expressions of distress
○  providing verbal and physical reassurance
○  frequent reminiscence to connect with person.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in an ageing support workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. These are situations relating to an emergency or unplanned procedures where assessment in these circumstances would be unsafe, impractical or threaten the dignity of the older person.
The following conditions must be met for this unit:
●  Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including individualised plans and any relevant equipment outlined in the plan
●  Modelling of industry operating conditions, including scenarios that reflect a range of dementia support services involving a range of dementia symptoms and behaviours of concern
Overall, assessment must involve some real interactions with people with dementia, colleagues and families/carers.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - http://www.cshisc.com.au
4. Implement strategies which minimise the impact of behaviours of concern
4.1.  Identify behaviours of concern and potential triggers
4.2.  Contribute to team discussions on support planning and review
4.3.  Take action to minimise the likelihood of and reduce the impact of behaviours on the person and others
4.4.  Evaluate implemented strategies with the support planning team to ensure effectiveness in minimising behaviours
4.1 – Identify behaviours of concern and potential triggers
By the end of the chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ List a range of behaviours of concern for those with dementia
⮚ Identify situations or triggers which can be responsible for behaviours of concern
⮚ Explain how not to react to behaviours of concern.
Behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia
With dementia comes behavioural changes – these are inevitable, and most can be managed and accepted. However, it is important to be able to identify particular concerning behaviours.
They may include:
⮚ Physical aggression
⮚ Psychosis (hallucinations/delusions)
⮚ Social withdrawal
⮚ Verbal disruption
⮚ Repetitive actions or questions
⮚ Resistance to personal care
⮚ Sexually inappropriate behaviour
⮚ Refusal to accept services
⮚ Problems associated with eating
⮚ Socially inappropriate behaviour
⮚ Wandering or intrusiveness
⮚ Sleep disturbances.
All of these symptoms can be signs of dementia and, if you note any of these in patients, they should be assessed by a medical professional and diagnosed appropriately.
Behavioural triggers
Now you have identified the symptoms of dementia, the next stage is to try and identify the potential triggers for these behaviours.
It may be that they only react in a concerning way in certain situations – if this is the case, it may be possible to remove this trigger from their life, therefore eliminating the problem. This is where person- centred care becomes essential – it will help identify the individual causes for each patient.
Possible causes of concerning behaviour may include the following:
⮚ Unfamiliar environments
⮚ Changes in routines
⮚ Difficulty understanding what's happening to them
⮚ Feeling humiliated/frightened
⮚ Frustration about communication difficulties
⮚ Physical effects of dementia (making them less independent)
⮚ Loss of inhibitions and awareness of rules
⮚ Trying to communicate unmet needs.
You should refrain from becoming angry or upset about their changes in behaviour – their behaviour is often not deliberately aggressive or upsetting, or even aimed specifically at you. It can sometimes just be down to you being the person present when the trigger sets off their behavioural/psychological change.
Try and establish what is wrong in order to prevent future occurrences of the behaviour – it can often be a way of them trying to communicate a problem to you. Don't attempt to argue and remain calm in the face of the behaviour – allow it to pass naturally and give them plenty of space.
If possible, try and identify early warning signs of the concerning behaviour and assess the environment for any possible causes – if you can remove it at this early stage, you can prevent the behaviour from developing into anything more concerning/aggressive.
You should communicate with colleagues and carers to discuss any behavioural triggers for all patients – they can often be simple things such as changing batteries in hearing aids, so they can understand you. There is also the simple matter of talking to the person with dementia and ask what is upsetting them – reassure them that you will resolve the problem and be patient with them.
Activity 4A
4.2 – Contribute to team discussions on support planning and review
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify matters which might be discussed at a team discussion for someone with dementia
⮚ Create a draft agenda for such a meeting.
Team discussions
Once triggers and behaviours are identified, the next stage is to create a care plan that addresses and resolves the triggers. This should involve discussion between carers, care home managers, family carers and the person with dementia themselves.
Everyone involved should have a role in decision-making; remember that the person with dementia has a choice in their care plan – they cannot be forced to do anything they don't want.
The aim should be to minimise the concerning behaviours – the aims of the discussions should be to:
⮚ Identify any medical causes
⮚ Identify any physical discomforts
⮚ Discuss medication and side effects
⮚ Identify the warning signs of behaviours
⮚ Reduce the demands on the person with dementia
⮚ Eliminate stressful situations
⮚ Create a consistent and planned routine
⮚ Keep the environment stable
⮚ Explain the plan to the patient, in short, simple sentences and a calm, reassuring tone
⮚ Avoid confrontation
⮚ Ensure regular exercise is part of the plan
⮚ Ensure the person is comfortable.
The existing care plan should be reviewed to make sure that it is meeting all of the client's current needs – if they have changed since the last assessment, the care plan needs to be adapted accordingly.
Some of the successful tactics for minimising concerning behaviours may include:
⮚ Distraction
⮚ Current events
⮚ Reminiscences
⮚ Music, dancing
⮚ Walking
⮚ Talking reassuringly about familiar and favourite topics
⮚ Behaviour modification (if appropriate)
⮚ Addressing physical triggers to behaviour including pain
⮚ Alternative therapies.
Activity 4B
4.3 – Take action to minimise the likelihood of and reduce the impact of behaviours on the person and others
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Outline five psychosocial strategies and their methodology for minimising the likelihood and reducing the impact of behaviours on the person and others
⮚ Demonstrate the application of two psychological strategies previously identified in response to a given person.
Taking action
Once the appropriate strategies for behavioural minimisation have been identified, they now need to be implemented and monitored – these include:
⮚ Distraction
⮚ Current events
⮚ Reminiscences
⮚ Music, dancing
⮚ Walking
⮚ Talking reassuringly about familiar and favourite topics
⮚ Behaviour modification (if appropriate)
⮚ Addressing physical triggers to behaviour including pain
⮚ Alternative therapies.
The idea of these strategies is that they reduce the impact of the undesired behaviours on the carer and other people. The types of management are strategies psychosocial and pharmacological.
Psychosocial strategies
These can be used to manage a wide variety of behaviours exhibited by people with dementia. They include the following:
⮚ Validation therapy:
o accepts 'reality' of the person with dementia (no matter how absurd it is)
o reduces stress and frustration reactions
o relies on verbal and non-verbal communication cues
➢ Exercise therapy:
o improves health and wellbeing
o adds social elements and increased movement quality, equalling a better quality of life
o make sure the participants are safe to exercise (consult doctors and physios)
⮚ Multi-sensory stimulation:
o involves stimulating sight, hearing, touch, taste and smell
o uses music, lighting, scented objects
o improves concentration, alertness and wellbeing
o be careful not to over-stimulate (this can have the opposite effect)
⮚ Scheduled reassurance therapy (SRT):
o positive social interactions for one minute every 30 minutes
o repeated throughout the day
o reduces agitation, anxiety and provides companionship
o consistency is key – if the cycle is broken it can lead to the symptoms you are trying to prevent
⮚ Aromatherapy:
o uses essential oils to calm the patient, e.g. lemon balm and lavender
o ensure it doesn't conflict with current medications
⮚ Spirituality:
o includes alternative and traditional beliefs
o can reduce anxiety and provide comfort
⮚ Pet therapy:
o animals/pets used to improve quality of life, reducing anxiety and stress
o should be done under supervision (as animals may react unpredictably)
⮚ Music therapy:
o can involve humming, singing, listening, laying or swaying/tapping feet
o using favourite music is most beneficial
o avoid triggering unpleasant memories
⮚ Bright light therapy:
o exposure to natural sunlight (or equivalent) for 30 minute periods in the morning and evening
o can reduce sleep disturbance
o intensity and time needs to be closely monitored
⮚ Reality orientation therapy:
o using verbal and visual prompts to re-orientate a person to the present
o reduces agitation and assists with independence
o distress can alert you whether they need to be re-orientated
⮚ Spaced retrieval:
o used for information retention
o uses prompt questions and answers to help recall information
o time between tests is gradually increased
o improves memory and independence
o use a trained specialist for best results
⮚ Doll therapy:
o interaction with a lifelike baby doll
o reduces agitation, improves quality of life and provides social interaction
⮚ Simulated presence therapy:
o pre-recorded audio or video loops used to stimulate conversation with the person in the recording
o controls boredom and reduces agitation
o ensure that they have a positive reaction to the recording
o don't use it as a replacement for actual social interaction
⮚ Dementia friendly environments:
o environments purpose-built to be inhabited by people with dementia
o features include:
▪  disability enabling
▪  self-orienting
▪  allowing independence
▪  reinforcing identity
▪  minimal staff involvement required.
Pharmacological strategies
Sometimes, medication will be required to control behaviours. However, there are a number of behaviours it is poor at solving:
⮚ Shouting
⮚ Wandering or pacing
⮚ Repetition
⮚ Cognitive deficiencies
⮚ Incontinence
⮚ Insomnia
⮚ Withdrawal.
They can, however, be used to treat conditions like depression and psychosis. The types of medicines that may be used include:
⮚ Psychotropic medicines
⮚ Antipsychotics
⮚ Benzodiazepines
⮚ Anticholinesterases
⮚ N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonist
⮚ Anticonvulsants
⮚ Antidepressants.
The medication should be monitored closely and regular reassessments conducted. It should be started at the lowest possible dose, and one medication started at a time – otherwise, it is hard to monitor the effects. Also, side effects should be noted and reviewed – all of the previous should only be done by a medical professional.
Activity 4C
4.4 – Evaluate implemented strategies with support planning team to ensure effectiveness in minimising behaviours
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify the information which should be recorded in a sample observation
⮚ Outline the ABC method for analysing behaviour
⮚ Write an evaluation of strategies implemented in a previous activity.
Evaluating strategies
Evaluating the implemented strategies is about assessing whether they are working to minimise behaviours of concern or not. In order to evaluate, you will need to observe the client for a nominated amount of time and make a record of what you find. It is important to share your findings with your team so they can be prepared to handle the behaviour either differently, (if behaviour strategies did not work) or the same (if they did work).
Observing clients
Event samples are good for assessing concerns about behaviour. They focus on one type of behaviour, tracking it over a period of time (such as a day or a week) to see how often this behaviour is displayed and the possible reasons behind it.
You may have to record:
⮚ The event number
⮚ The date/time
⮚ The context of the situation, e.g. family visited, going to bed
⮚ Who was involved? e.g. family members, carers
⮚ Dialogue/incident.
If your strategy did not work, you could try the ABC method to find out why.
ABC method
You can use the ABC method for analysing behaviour in dementia clients. This looks at three different elements to try to assess what caused the reaction.
ABC method:
⮚ A = Antecedent: the event that happened directly before the client became upset
⮚ B = Behaviour: the upsetting behaviour
⮚ C = Consequence: the events happening as a response to the behaviour.
You will also need to look at the many environmental factors – for example, the task being completed, the communication and interactions between people. Try to consider things from the patient’s view thinking about their likes and dislikes.

Questions:
1. What behaviours are of a concern for those with dementia? List at least six behaviours.
*
2. What situations or ‘triggers’ can be responsible for behaviours of concern? List at least four possibilities.
*
3. How should you not react to behaviours of concern?
*
4. What types of matters might you discuss at a team discussion for someone with dementia? Create a draft agenda for such a meeting.
*
5. Outline five psychosocial strategies and their methodology for minimising the likelihood and reducing the impact of behaviours on the person and others.
*
6. In an event sample observation, what information should you record?
*
7. What is the ABC method for analysing behaviour?
