This unit applies to workers in a residential or community context, including family homes. Work performed requires some discretion and judgment and may be carried out under regular direct or indirect supervision.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards, and industry codes of practice.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
5.   Complete documentation
5.1 Comply with the organisation’s reporting requirements, including reporting observations to supervisor
5.2 Complete, maintain and store documentation according to organisation policy and protocols
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills) that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
●  Provided support to 2 different people living with dementia:
○  using a person-centered approach to support
○  using appropriate communication strategies
○  assisting in implementing a range of suitable activities that meet the person’s needs.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
●  Up to date research on dementia and the different manifestations of dementia, including:
○  Alzheimer’s disease
○  vascular dementia or multi-infarct dementia
○  Lewy bodies
○  excessive alcohol intake or Korsakov Syndrome
○  fronto temporal lobar degeneration (FLTD) including Pick’s disease
○  Huntington’s disease
○  Parkinson’s disease
○  younger onset dementia
●  Dementia as a progressive neurological condition, including pathological features:
○  amyloid plaques
○  neurofibrillary tangles
○  loss of connection between cells and cell death
●  Common indicators and symptoms of dementia
●  Behaviours of concern, needs driven behaviour model and de-escalation procedures
●  Progression of dementia and potential impact on the person with dementia, their family and significant others, including:
○  depression
○  loss and grieving
○  anger
○  despair
○  social embarrassment a family member might feel
○  isolation
○  financial burden on the family
○  social devaluation
●  Principles of person-centred approach to support
●  Relevant activities which enhance self-esteem and pleasure in the person’s life, minimise boredom, and distract from or eliminate behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia
●  Competency and image enhancement as a means of addressing devaluation
●  Verbal and non-verbal communication strategies including:
○  reality orientation
○  reminders of the day, the time, relationships, occasions
○  reassuring words, phrases and body language
○  validation
○  empathy
○  acceptance of the person’s reality
○  acknowledgement
○  allowing expressions of distress
○  providing verbal and physical reassurance
○  frequent reminiscence to connect with person.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in an ageing support workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. These are situations relating to an emergency or unplanned procedures where assessment in these circumstances would be unsafe, impractical or threaten the dignity of the older person.
The following conditions must be met for this unit:
●  Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including individualised plans and any relevant equipment outlined in the plan
●  Modelling of industry operating conditions, including scenarios that reflect a range of dementia support services involving a range of dementia symptoms and behaviours of concern
Overall, assessment must involve some real interactions with people with dementia, colleagues and families/carers.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - http://www.cshisc.com.au
5. Complete documentation
5.1.  Comply with the organisation’s reporting requirements, including reporting observations to supervisor
5.2.  Complete, maintain and store documentation according to organisation policy and protocols
5.1 – Comply with the organisation’s reporting requirements, including reporting observations to supervisor
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Outline organisation’s reporting requirements for written and verbal reports
⮚ Create a mock report for a fictional observation.
Organisation’s reporting requirements
When creating reports and workplace documents, you need to comply with organisational reporting requirements at all times.
As well as being aware of the client's beliefs and values, you should observe them and document what you see – documentation should be objective and used to make any adjustments to the care plan in the future.
In order to keep track of the quality of service, it is important to have good documentation practices in place. Each person receiving aged care services must have a care plan in place to monitor their ongoing needs. This care plan should contain progress notes, as these will be used to review care needs in the future. Besides being useful, this documentation is a legal requirement and will directly affect how much government funding the person in care receives.
The following general tips are useful in all cases:
⮚ Documentation should be completed as soon as possible after any event/incident
⮚ Progress notes are legal documents. They must be filled out the following way:
o using black ink and printed
o no correction fluids (tip-ex, whiteout) to be used
o corrections must be indicated by a line drawn over the mistake. initial the correction and re- write the information
o draw a line to the end of the page where documenting information does not fill all the allocated lines (as per a personal cheque)
o date all notes and include the time of the incident
o sign all notes a print documenter's name and position/status.
Written documents
Ensure progress notes are written in the active voice rather than the passive, as this gets the message across more directly and helps with concise writing. Written documents can include progress reports, case notes and incident reports.
Documents should be:
⮚ Concise
⮚ Objective
⮚ By exception
⮚ Appropriate in the language (no slang, unless recording direct speech)
⮚ Include only necessary information.
Concise documentation
This means including the right amount of information – not too little or too much. You need to get to the point in as few words as possible; use appropriate words, sentence structures, and avoid frivolous information that is not relevant.
Objective documentation
This involves only including the facts in the documentation and no opinions or bias affecting what is recorded. Subjective information is based on assumptions and feelings and will not accurately portray the incident.
Documentation by exception
This means to only include events and information that affect the care plan. Such examples could be changes in client behaviour, emotions, and physical ability, as well as incidents involving the client.
You need to think in terms of things that:
⮚ Will affect the direction of the care plan
⮚ Relate to the health of the client
⮚ Involve client care refusals, care omissions, client complaints
⮚ Involve client behaviour affecting their health and wellbeing.
Verbal reports
These can be done face-to-face or over the telephone. You should use this method of reporting when communication is required urgently, or in an emergency situation, i.e. those involving the immediate safety of carers or the people in care.
The same principles apply to verbal reporting as to written reporting – keep it concise, objective and include only relevant information.
Structuring notes
When thinking of what information to include in notes, use the following as a guide:
⮚ Who is it about?
⮚ Where did it happen?
⮚ When did it happen?
⮚ What happened?
⮚ Why did it happen?
⮚ How did it happen (if factual evidence exists)?
⮚ What did you do (if applicable)?
Incident reports
Incident reports are an important aspect of documenting the process. If you notice an inconsistency, it could be related to an incident. The essential elements to an incident report involve answering the following questions about the incident.
⮚ Who?
⮚ What?
⮚ When?
⮚ Where?
⮚ How and why?
The following table demonstrates the essential components of an incident report and how they might be used to guide you to giving details on incidents.
Component
Question
Answer
Who?                Who is reporting the incident?
Who is affected by it?
What?                What happened?
What action did you take?
How severe is the incident? (you may use an incident severity scale)
When?
When did the incident take place?
Where?
Where did the incident take place?
How and why?
What were the elements that contributed to the incident?
A good incident report should be:
⮚ Complete – it should cover all components in relevant detail
⮚ Concise – it should include everything that is needed but exclude flowery descriptions, abbreviations can be used put sparingly as they can also cause confusion and detract from the writing
⮚ Specific – It should make reference to exact times, dates and other facts
⮚ Objective – It should not give opinions or inferences
⮚ Confidential – the identities of who was involved and where it took place should not be revealed in the ‘what happened’ box as this has to be sent to the Department of Health.
Activity 5A
5.2 – Complete, maintain and store documentation according to organisation policy and protocols
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Outline how to complete and maintain documentation
⮚ Suggest how records can be made identifiable
⮚ Complete one piece of workplace documentation according to organisation policy and protocols.
Completing and maintaining documentation
Documentation must be maintained in line with reporting requirements – this means ensuring that it is kept in a safe place, backed up, and easily accessible for future use. It can also mean updating and amending existing documentation.
The very documentation system you use must be kept up-to-date – this can mean digitalising existing records (if your organisation hasn't already done so). It can also mean shifting records onto a new server, as cloud storage becomes more popular in the modern age.
If the reporting format changes, you may have to update older formatted documentation to comply with the new system – keeping things consistent makes documents easier to interpret; while the initial time spent doing this can appear costly, it saves more time in the long run.
It is a good idea to have a checklist of things to remember for documentation so that the maintenance process is minimal.
You should appoint a registrar, who is responsible for updating the documentation system – they are the point of authority, and nothing can be moved or updated without their consent. This ensures that documentation is well tracked and the system is consistent across the board.
Creating a procedural manual is a good idea to outline the documentation processes in full and ensure that there is no doubt over how to do things and that nothing is omitted.
Documentation must be filed in accordance with organisation policy and protocols – this ensures it can easily be located at a later time. For instance, there may be a dispute about the quality and level of care, which can easily be resolved by accessing and consulting the documents relevant to the time.
Filing is something many people have problems with; organisation cannot only make you more productive, but it can also simplify your workload and make it less stressful to file or look for a specific document in the future.
Documenting information
Making records identifiable
It is highly important to make records easily identifiable so that mistakes do not occur when treating clients.
You might need to include the following information:
⮚ Unique identifier, e.g. medical record number
⮚ Client’s full name
⮚ Date of birth/age
⮚ Sex.
Some organisations use a printed sticky label that includes all the above identifying information.
Documentation standards
When completing documentation, there are a set of standards that you should comply with.
Standards that you should uphold include:
⮚ Be clear and accurate
⮚ Ensure writing is legible and in English
⮚ Only use approved abbreviations and symbols
⮚ Use dark ink that you cannot erase
⮚ Include date and time of entry using 24-hour clock method
⮚ Include name of author and signature (or electronic alternative)
⮚ Students or support workers should sign and then have their signature co-signed by supervisor
⮚ Structure writing and give relevant details so as to be clear
⮚ Be objective in your writing
⮚ Distinguish between what was observed or performed, what was reported by others as happening and/ or professional opinion
⮚ Make records as soon as possible after an event
⮚ Any bare lines at the end of your writing should be crossed with a line to show they are not left for later entries
⮚ Do not use personal information of other people unless necessary
⮚ Additional details should be integrated and documented next to the heading ‘addendum’ with the date and time of the omitted information and date and time of the subsequent addendum
⮚ If an error has occurred, you should leave it so that it is readable with one line drawn through to show that it is a mistake (or in electronic write ‘written in error’). Errors
should include the author’s name, signature, time and date of correction. Electronic errors should be linked to a note saying ‘written in error’.
Frequency of documentation
There are also regulations for when records should be updated. These should reflect the care that the client has received.
For example:
⮚ By each carer to give care to client/each session
⮚ Significant changes to the client’s condition
⮚ Significant changes to treatment/activities/preferences
⮚ Reviews.
Other relevant standards
Other standards regarding documentation include:
⮚ Documentation of telephone conversations between client and health worker – identification of the caller must be documented
⮚ Any leave taken by clients
⮚ Leave taken against medical advice – should obtain a client signature.
The above standards refer to the New South Wales area; they may differ slightly between areas so you must check with your state (http://www0.health.nsw.gov.au/policies/pd/2012/pdf/PD2012_069.pdf).
Note on confidentiality: Health care workers should only access documents about clients when it is directly related to their duties
Managing computer directories
A computer directory is a computer-based filing system that is organised into files and folders on a computer. You will be given specific procedures in order to manage this system correctly and according to your organisational requirements.
To manage this filing system, you may need to:
⮚ Create new folders
⮚ Copy folders or files within folders and move to other locations
⮚ Change the name of a file or folder
⮚ Delete files and folders.
Sorting and storing information
How information is stored depends upon the purpose of the task; long-term storage should be in a secure location, either in the office or on the computer, whereas short-term storage tasks will vary from task to task. An example of this would be putting some papers into a folder for a co-worker to collect on their way to a meeting this afternoon; the papers would be stored in a folder, which, in turn, would be placed in the worker’s pigeonhole or tray.
⮚ Established procedure: this may be implemented by organisational stipulation or through how your workplace works
⮚ Organisational stipulation will likely be company-wide and is in place to ensure that legal obligations are met and that a uniform system is used across the company
⮚ Workplaces may have their own system that revolves around the space, layout and staffing of the office, for example:
o the use of filing cabinets
o whether all staff have access to the same files on the computer
o whether staff have pigeonholes or trays
o whether there is a member of staff employed to manage the information system or whether everyone does their own work
o security restrictions:
▪  who has access to the computer?
▪  who has access to the filing cabinet?
▪  who has access to the office area?
If you do not have access to records, you may need to ask a supervisor for assistance. If there is a member of staff appointed to manage information systems, you may need to leave the task with them. Your level of authority in this area and workplace procedures will affect how you carry out a task, so always remember to factor this into your work.
After sorting the documents, you will be ready to file them into their respective folders. A system will also be in place to make sure that more files are completed in the same manner. For example; alphabetical order, e.g. according to clients’ names, or chronological order, e.g. the oldest to the most current date, etc.

Questions:
1. What are your organisation’s reporting requirements for both written and verbal reports?
*
2. Create a mock report for a fictional observation, making sure that you follow the organisation’s reporting requirements. Forward your report to your supervisor, following approved protocol and procedure. Attach a copy to your workbook, also.
*
3. How can you complete and maintain documentation?
*
4. How can you make records identifiable?
*
5. Complete one workplace document according to organisation policy and protocols and attach this to your workbook. Then, in the space provided, write a brief description of the policy and protocol for maintaining and storing this document in usual work practice.