Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
6. Implement self care strategies
6.1 Monitor own stress level in relation to working with people with dementia
6.2 Use appropriate self care strategies and seek support if required
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills) that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
● Provided support to 2 different people living with dementia:
○ using a person-centered approach to support
○  using appropriate communication strategies
○  assisting in implementing a range of suitable activities that meet the person’s needs.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
●  Up to date research on dementia and the different manifestations of dementia, including:
○  Alzheimer’s disease
○ vascular dementia or multi-infarct dementia
○  Lewy bodies
○ excessive alcohol intake or Korsakov Syndrome
○ fronto temporal lobar degeneration (FLTD) including Pick’s disease
○ Huntington’s disease
○  Parkinson’s disease
○ younger onset dementia
● Dementia as a progressive neurological condition, including pathological features:
○ amyloid plaques
○  neurofibrillary tangles
○  loss of connection between cells and cell death
●  Common indicators and symptoms of dementia
●  Behaviours of concern, needs driven behaviour model and de-escalation procedures
●  Progression of dementia and potential impact on the person with dementia, their family and significant others, including:
○  depression
○  loss and grieving
○  anger
○  despair
○  social embarrassment a family member might feel
○  isolation
○  financial burden on the family
○  social devaluation
●  Principles of person-centred approach to support
●  Relevant activities which enhance self-esteem and pleasure in the person’s life, minimise boredom, and distract from or eliminate behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia
●  Competency and image enhancement as a means of addressing devaluation
●  Verbal and non-verbal communication strategies including:
○  reality orientation
○  reminders of the day, the time, relationships, occasions
○  reassuring words, phrases and body language
○  validation
○  empathy
○  acceptance of the person’s reality
○  acknowledgement
○  allowing expressions of distress
○  providing verbal and physical reassurance
○  frequent reminiscence to connect with person.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in an ageing support workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. These are situations relating to an emergency or unplanned procedures where assessment in these circumstances would be unsafe, impractical or threaten the dignity of the older person.
The following conditions must be met for this unit:
●  Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including individualised plans and any relevant equipment outlined in the plan
●  Modelling of industry operating conditions, including scenarios that reflect a range of dementia support services involving a range of dementia symptoms and behaviours of concern
Overall, assessment must involve some real interactions with people with dementia, colleagues and families/carers.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - http://www.cshisc.com.au
6. Implement self care strategies
6.1. Monitor own stress level in relation to working with people with dementia
6.2.  Use appropriate self care strategies and seek support if required
6.1 – Monitor own stress level in relation to working with people with dementia
By the end of the chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Monitor their own stress level by documenting it while working with people with dementia.
Monitoring own stress levels
As well as caring for patients, you also need to monitor your own health – one of the main factors related to working with people with dementia is stress – this is because of the high demands, in terms of time, the burden of caring for someone and the financial (if informal care) and social impacts of caring for someone with dementia.
Signs of stress
There are ten signs of stress in caregivers:
1. Denial – refusing to accept the reality of the disease and inevitable effects on the person with dementia
2. Anger – at the person diagnosed, that no cure exists or the reactions of other people
3. Depression – giving in to the inevitability of the situation and seeing no point in doing anything
4. Anxiety – worrying about what will happen in the future
5. Social withdrawal – becoming reclusive from activities and friends you used to do/see
6.  Sleeplessness – due to worrying and inability to relax, e.g. going over possibilities in your head while lying in bed
7.  Exhaustion – leading to a lack of desire to complete everyday tasks – they tend to stop taking care of themselves
8. Irritability – triggering negative responses and moodiness
9. Health problems – susceptibility to illnesses due to the mental and physical burden
10. Trouble concentrating – making it difficult to function and perform tasks that were once second nature
If you feel yourself getting stressed, you should utilise the help and resources available. These can be things like:
⮚ Additional carers
⮚ Counselling
⮚ Assistive services (meal delivery, visiting nurses, adult day programs)
⮚ Use carer support programs
⮚ Contact the National Dementia Helpline.
Managing stress
In order to minimise the amount of stress you experience from working with people with dementia, you should try and implement the following concepts into your life:
⮚ Develop a consistent schedule
⮚ Remember not to blame the person with dementia for their behaviour
⮚ Educate yourself on the effects of dementia and strategies for managing it
⮚ Talk to family, friends, or other people in a similar situation
⮚ Take care of yourself – manage your diet, take regular exercise and maintain a social life
⮚ Be realistic about your ability to carry out required tasks – if you take care of yourself, the quality of your care increases.
Activity 6A
6.2 – Use appropriate self care strategies and seek support if required
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify self-care strategies which could be employed to minimise the development of stress and manage any that surface.
Self-care strategies
As well as stress, there are a myriad of other feelings a carer may experience, such as guilt, anger, grief and loss. Whatever the feelings, it is important to have systems of dealing with them, so as not to be overcome by them.
These could include:
⮚ Allowing expression of the feelings (rather than bottling them up)
⮚ Crying
⮚ Talking (sharing feelings can be cathartic)
⮚ Keep a journal – writing feelings down can help you understand them and process them more easily
⮚ Don't become consumed by the feelings
⮚ Perform comforting rituals/behaviours
⮚ Think carefully before you make any decisions on your feelings
⮚ Find a balance between the negative feelings and positive ones in life
⮚ Rediscover your sense of humour.
Sharing the workload
If you feel you need help with your workload, it is important that you ask – this can be from friends, family and neighbours of the person with dementia. External help can also be sought from doctors, psychologists, social workers and counsellors.
The types of things that relatives can help with are things like meals, shopping, and housework. External help can offer up services such as day centres, where the person with dementia can be left while the carer has a brief break from their responsibilities.\
Resources/support systems
There are a number of support systems for those working with people suffering from dementia.
They include:
⮚ Aged Care Assessment Teams (ACATs) – they assess older people and help them, and carers work out effective care plans (residential or home care)
⮚ Aged Care Information Line – general information line for matters about care access, respite fees, bonds and charges
⮚ Commonwealth Respite and Carelink Centres (1800 059 059)– information on community care programs and services to allow dementia sufferers to live at home
⮚ Carer Advisory and Counselling Service – information and advice for carers on entitlements and relevant services
⮚ Doctors
⮚ Local councils
⮚ Local community health centre
⮚ Alzheimer's Australia (1800 100 500)
⮚ Aged Care Assessment Services (1300 135 090)
⮚ My Aged care (1800 200 422)
⮚ Cognitive Dementia and Memory Service clinics (1300 135 090)
⮚ Carers Victoria (1800 242 636)
⮚ Dementia Behaviour Management Advisory Service (1800 699 799).

Questions:
1. What are the ten signs of stress in caregivers and how can you manage them?
*
2. Over a period of two weeks, maintain a personal stress diary to monitor your own stress at work. When the diary is complete, produce a 300-400 word written evaluation of your personal stress levels. Your evaluation should cover:
 Which signs and symptoms of stress were present 
 Whether there was an increase in stress during the time period
 Which occasions caused the most stress
 Whether you feel you should employ stress management techniques as a result of your evaluation.
*
3. What self-care strategies could you employ to minimise the development of stress and manage any that surfaces? Provide four examples.