Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to provide individualised services in ways that support independence, as well as, physical and emotional wellbeing.
This unit applies to workers in a range of community services contexts who provide frontline support services within the context of an established individualised plan.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Sector
Not applicable
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
2. Promote independence
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
2.1 Support the person to identify and acknowledge their own strengths and self-care capacity
2.2 Assist the person to identify opportunities to utilise their strengths, while communicating the importance of using available support when required
2.3 Provide information and assistance to the person in order to facilitate access to support services and resources when needed
2.4 Provide support that allows the person to self-manage their own service delivery as appropriate
2.5 Encourage the person to build, strengthen and maintain independence
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be demonstrated evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Safely supported at least 3 people to enhance independence and wellbeing
⮚ Performed the activities outlined in the performance criteria of this unit during a period of at least 120 hours of direct support work in at least one aged care, home and community, disability or community service organisation.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Basic human needs:
o physical
o psychological
o spiritual
o cultural
o sexual
⮚ Concept of self-actualisation
⮚ Human development across the lifespan
⮚ Wellbeing, including:
o physical
o psychological
o social
o spiritual
o cultural
o financial
o career/occupation
⮚ Individual differences, how these may be interrelated and impact on support provided
⮚ Basic requirements for good health for the person, including:
o mental health
o nutrition and hydration
o exercise
o hygiene
o lifestyle
o oral health
⮚ Mental health uses and risk and protective factors
⮚ Indications of neglect or abuse:
o physical
o sexual
o psychological
o financial
⮚ Reporting requirements for suspected abuse situations
⮚ Service delivery models and standards
⮚ Relevant funding models
⮚ Issues that impact health and well being
⮚ Impacts of community values and attitudes, including myths and stereotypes
⮚ Issues surrounding sexuality and sexual expression
⮚ Indicators of emotional concerns and issues
⮚ Support strategies, resources and networks
⮚ Legal and ethical requirements and how these are applied in an organisation and individual practice, including:
o duty of care
o dignity of risk
o human rights
o discrimination
o mandatory reporting
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in a relevant workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. Where simulation is used it must reflect real working conditions and contingencies by modelling industry operating conditions and contingencies, as well as using suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
⮚ Individualised plans and any relevant equipment outlined in the plan
⮚ Modelling of industry operating conditions including real interactions with the person and their carers.
Overall, assessment must involve some real interactions with the person and their families/carers.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
2. Promote independence
2.1.  Support the person to identify and acknowledge their own strengths and self-care capacity
2.2.  Assist the person to identify opportunities to utilise their strengths, while communicating the importance of using available support when required
2.3.  Provide information and assistance to the person in order to facilitate access to support services and resources when needed
2.4.  Provide support that allows the person to self-manage their own service delivery as appropriate
2.5.  Encourage the person to build, strengthen and maintain independence
2.1 – Support the person to identify and acknowledge their own strengths and self-care capacity
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Explain the importance of promoting independence and define client strengths and self-care capacity
⮚ Effectively support a client to identify and acknowledge their strengths and self-care capacity.
Promoting independence
Independence is often considered one of the most important attributes that a person can possess. Following the principles of person-centred and strengths-based support and care, it is essential that you promote the independence of your clients. Your clients should be encouraged to do as much as possible for themselves. Your role is to promote this independence; get your clients to do what they feel comfortable with doing. You should strive to help your clients improve their quality of life whilst maintaining their pride and keeping their dignity. Just because an individual needs care and support, it doesn’t mean their life should stop. You should do what you can, and what they feel comfortable with, to promote their independence.
The level of independence a client has will obviously depend on the individual client and their particular situation; everyone is different and likes their own things. For example, for one client, making their own cup of tea in the morning is something that they may not be ready to lose. How can you ensure they keep this little bit of independence? The next few chapters will look at the different ways that you can promote, encourage and support your clients’ independence.
Clients’ strengths
The first step to promoting your clients’ independence is to support them in identifying and acknowledging their own strengths. Taking a strengths- based approach to care and support involves you working in collaboration with your clients to find a level of care and support that draws on their particular strengths. You should value the skills, knowledge and abilities of your clients and you should help them in finding out what they are good at. By identifying and acknowledging their strengths, your clients can be in control of their care and support. Also, it gives you the opportunity to provide them with care and support in a way that allows them to lead.
So how can you support your clients in identifying their needs? It’s about figuring out what they are capable of doing and what they are particularly
good at doing. What different elements can help or enable your client to deal with the challenges of
day-to-day life? What different elements can help or enable your client to meet their needs and achieve their outcomes?
These different elements are their strengths and can include:
⮚ Their personal resources, abilities, skills, knowledge and potential
⮚ Their social network and its resources, abilities, skills, knowledge and potential.
Source: What is a strengths-based approach to care? (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.scie.org.uk/care-act-2014/assessment-and-eligibility/strengths-based (Accessed 07.06.19)
Examples of the strengths that your client may have include:
⮚ Interpersonal relationships and supports (e.g. friends and family)
⮚ Ability to set and pursue goals
⮚ They are optimistic and motivated.
Once you and your client are aware of their strengths, you will need to utilise them to empower your clients and get them to focus on their health and wellbeing. How can they use their particular strengths to aid the care and support that you are providing them with?
Self-care capacity
As well as supporting clients to identify and acknowledge their strengths, you should also support them in identifying and acknowledging their self-care capacity.
A client’s self-care capacity is related to their ability to:
⮚ Manage own health
⮚ Take care of themselves
⮚ Identify what they need and want
⮚ Take the necessary steps to get what they need and want
⮚ Ask for what they need and want.
In order to assess a client’s ability to manage their own health, answer the following questions:
⮚ How are they able to maintain their health, life and general wellbeing?
⮚ Do they eat a healthy, balanced diet?
⮚ Do they exercise regularly?
⮚ Do they get enough sleep?
⮚ Do they take their medication as prescribed?
⮚ Do they avoid high-risk behaviours (e.g. drinking and smoking excessively)?
It could also be more specific to their particular condition or situation.
For example, if they have a dressing that will need changing daily, are they able and willing to do this themselves? You will find that a client’s self-care capacity will depend on many things, including their age, family system, health status, developmental state and resource availability. Combined with a client’s strengths, their capacity for self-care can determine how to offer them the best possible care and support.
Activity 2A
2.2 – Assist the person to identify opportunities to utilise their strengths, while communicating the importance of using available support when required
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Give examples of methods to assist a person to correctly identify relevant opportunities to utilise their strengths
⮚ Explain the benefits of communicating the importance of using available support
⮚ Assist a person to complete a task by utilising their strengths while communicating the importance of using available support when required.
Utilising strengths
The previous chapter explored what client strengths may include; this chapter will look at the ways that you can assist your client to identify opportunities to utilise their strengths. Opportunities are the tasks and activities that can give your client the chance to be independent, to grow and to assist in their own care. We know that client strengths refer to the capabilities, interests, knowledge, resources, goals and objectives of the individual and their social network (e.g. friends and family). But in what ways can these strengths be utilised and enhanced? How can your clients use their strengths to contribute to their care and support? How can they use these strengths to improve their particular situation? It’s all about matching tasks to your clients’ abilities and skills; what kind of tasks can they manage or excel at?
It can range from simple things like:
⮚ Washing their own face
⮚ Making their own cup of tea
⮚ Opening their own post
⮚ Watering their plants
⮚ Setting the table.
It may also involve more complicated tasks, for example:
⮚ Preparing and cooking their own meals
⮚ Cleaning tasks
⮚ Doing the gardening or DIY
⮚ Being in charge of their medication
⮚ Changing their dressings.
Think about how the strengths of a client’s friends and family can also be utilised, for example:
⮚ They may be able to provide basic health and personal care (e.g. assisting client in washing and dressing)
⮚ They may be able to provide domestic assistance (e.g. assisting with preparing/cooking meals and cleaning duties)
⮚ They may be able to accompany the client when leaving the house (e.g. to go shopping or to the post office)
⮚ They may be able to help monitor the health and wellbeing of the client
⮚ They may be able to provide client with emotional, financial and social support.
You should remember that even though clients should use any opportunities to utilise their strengths that arise, they should also use any available support when required. It is your job to communicate the importance of using this support should your clients need it. Just because
they have the capability of doing some tasks and can use their strengths in a variety of ways, it doesn’t mean that they should refuse or ignore any level of support altogether. For example, if a client is able to make their own cup of tea but still struggles to make their own hot meals, you should encourage them to use meal preparation and/or delivery services. If they are able to walk to the shop down the road every morning to get their papers but cannot manage the longer walk to supermarket for their groceries, you could encourage them to use transport services.
Activity 2B
2.3 – Provide information and assistance to the person in order to facilitate access to support services and resources when needed
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Give examples of the different support services and resources that are available within a specific area
⮚ Conduct meaningful research and make appropriate suggestions on services and resources available in a specific area
⮚ Summarise information in a format that can be present to a person needing support.
Support services and resources
There are many support services and resources available for clients in both residential environments and the community. These services will be run by the government, charities and just general good Samaritans who want to help others. It is your job to provide clients with the relevant information and assistance in order to facilitate access to these support services and resources.
Support services and resources may include:
⮚ Pensions
⮚ Rental assistance
⮚ Disability payments and services
⮚ Veteran facilities
⮚ Medical and pharmaceutical funding
⮚ Acute care
⮚ Coffee mornings
⮚ Trips/excursions
⮚ Counselling
⮚ Support programs
⮚ Information services
⮚ Cards that allow discounts of range of products and services (particularly for elderly clients)
⮚ Travel passes.
Some clients may already be aware, or in receipt of, support services and resources. However, they may not be aware of other services and resources that they could benefit from. It is part of your responsibility to monitor your clients and decide if they could benefit from any of these services or resources. You should try and keep up to date with local and government support services at all times. Something as simple as local coffee mornings can benefit your clients; these may help a client to socialise and maintain their independence.
If you believe a client can benefit from a service, you should discuss it with them and the relevant personnel. You can determine if the client wants to utilise the service and if their relatives/advocates feel as though it is appropriate. You will also need to determine if the individual is entitled to the support, needs funding or is entitled to funding. You may then need to provide your client with any relevant information (e.g. how much it will cost and if there is any need for transport) and in some cases, you may have to make arrangements for them.
Activity 2C
2.4 – Provide support that allows the person to self manage their own service delivery as appropriate
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Explain the importance of providing support that allows clients to self-manage their own service delivery
⮚ Give five examples of ways you can support clients in a way that allows them to self-manage their own service delivery.
Supporting clients to self-manage own service delivery
As we have established, it is important that clients are independent and have control over their own service delivery. They should have a central role in managing their condition and should make their own decisions. Your job is to provide support that allows your clients to do this. Although health professionals are experts in diseases and treatment, your clients are experts in how they want to live their life. How can your support allow clients to take care of their own health? How can your support allow clients to manage their illness/condition?
This may involve supporting your clients in learning about their condition and developing the skills that they need to manage their health. You could locate a support group that they can attend, get them books, leaflets or brochures that they can read or conduct research with them.
Think about the different ways that you can provide support in a way that allows your clients to self- manage their own service delivery.
For example:
⮚ Encouraging clients to brush their teeth, wash their face and comb their hair
⮚ Assisting clients to take control of their diet, do their own shopping and prepare their own meals
⮚ Allowing clients to choose their own clothes and get themselves dressed
⮚ Giving clients the chance to monitor their own blood pressure
⮚ Taking clients for walks if they are capable of gentle exercise
⮚ Allowing clients to be in control of their own medication (if appropriate).
You should never just do something because it is quicker and easier for you; if your client is capable of doing something, then you should let them.
Activity 2D
2.5 – Encourage the person to build, strengthen and maintain independence
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Outline effective methods to encourage clients to build, strengthen and maintain independence.
Encouraging independence
We know how important client independence is. The past few chapters have looked into different ways that you can promote clients’ independence. You should encourage and allow your clients to be independent. They should be fully involved in the design, development and delivery of their care and support. This will ensure that the care and support they receive is a reflection of their particular needs and preferences. By building, strengthening and maintaining their independence, clients are able to improve their quality of life. You should give clients ‘just enough’ support, promoting their ability to do as much for themselves as possible. The care and support that you deliver should maximise their skills and abilities.
To summarise the previous chapters, promoting independence involves:
⮚ Assisting clients to identify, acknowledge and utilise their strengths
⮚ Assisting clients accessing support services and resources
⮚ Providing support in a manner that encourages clients to self-manage their own service delivery.
In what other ways can you encourage your clients to build, strengthen and maintain their independence?
It may involve:
⮚ Acknowledging that each client will have their individual pathway
⮚ Working with clients to create a care and support plan
⮚ Working with clients to identify their needs, goals and aspirations
⮚ Delivering care and support in a way that supports clients’ plans
⮚ Teaching clients/encouraging them to learn new skills (e.g. using the internet or cooking skills)
⮚ Encouraging clients to make their own decisions (e.g. what to wear and eat)
⮚ Respecting their privacy (e.g. knocking before you enter their room and asking before you go through any of their belongings).
Activity 2E
1. Briefly explain the importance of promoting independence within your clients, outlining client strengths and self-care capacity (maximum 250 words).
*
2. Write a short conversation with a client to support them in identifying and acknowledging their own strengths and self-care capacity.
*
3. Give six examples of the different ways that you can assist a client to identify opportunities to utilise their strengths.
*
4. Why is it essential to communicate the importance of using the available support to clients? (Maximum 100 words)
*
5. Using one example identified in Question 1, encourage a client to complete the task by utilising their strengths and communicate the importance of using available support when required.
*
6. Give five examples of the different support services and resources that are available within your area.
*
7. Imagine one of your clients doesn’t really get out of the house and is starting to get lonely. You think that they could benefit from getting out of the house and socialising with others. Conduct further research on appropriate services and resources available in your area.    
	Male and aged 35                                     
	Likes films and reading                     
	Finds it difficult to communicate and struggles with anxiety                                             
	No relatives.                                
Summarise the information that you have found here in a format that could be presented to the client.
*
8. Explain the importance of providing support that allows clients to self-manage their own service delivery (maximum 50 words).
*
9. Give five examples of ways you can support clients in a way that allows them to self-manage their own service delivery.
*
10. Outline six ways that you can encourage clients to build, strengthen and maintain independence.
*
11. Encourage a client to build, strengthen and maintain their independence using one of the ideas identified in Question 1.Note how you achieved this and your reasons behind your choices.
