Summative Assessments                                          24
References                                                 25
Unit of Competency
Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to provide individualised services in ways that support independence, as well as, physical and emotional wellbeing.
This unit applies to workers in a range of community services contexts who provide frontline support services within the context of an established individualised plan.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Sector
Not applicable
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
3. Support physical wellbeing
3.1 Promote and encourage daily living habits that contribute to healthy lifestyle
3.2 Support and assist the person to maintain a safe and healthy environment
3.3 Identify hazards and report according to organisation procedures
3.4 Identify variations in a person’s physical condition and report according to organisation procedures
3.5 Recognise indications that the person’s physical situation is affecting their wellbeing and report according to organisation procedures
3.6 Identify physical health situations beyond scope of own role and report to relevant person
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be demonstrated evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Safely supported at least 3 people to enhance independence and wellbeing
⮚ Performed the activities outlined in the performance criteria of this unit during a period of at least 120 hours of direct support work in at least one aged care, home and community, disability or community service organisation.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Basic human needs:
o physical
o psychological
o spiritual
o cultural
o sexual
⮚ Concept of self-actualisation
⮚ Human development across the lifespan
⮚ Wellbeing, including:
o physical
o psychological
o social
o spiritual
o cultural
o financial
o career/occupation
⮚ Individual differences, how these may be interrelated and impact on support provided
⮚ Basic requirements for good health for the person, including:
o mental health
o nutrition and hydration
o exercise
o hygiene
o lifestyle
o oral health
⮚ Mental health uses and risk and protective factors
⮚ Indications of neglect or abuse:
o physical
o sexual
o psychological
o financial
⮚ Reporting requirements for suspected abuse situations
⮚ Service delivery models and standards
⮚ Relevant funding models
⮚ Issues that impact health and well being
⮚ Impacts of community values and attitudes, including myths and stereotypes
⮚ Issues surrounding sexuality and sexual expression
⮚ Indicators of emotional concerns and issues
⮚ Support strategies, resources and networks
⮚ Legal and ethical requirements and how these are applied in an organisation and individual practice, including:
o duty of care
o dignity of risk
o human rights
o discrimination
o mandatory reporting
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in a relevant workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. Where simulation is used it must reflect real working conditions and contingencies by modelling industry operating conditions and contingencies, as well as using suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
⮚ Individualised plans and any relevant equipment outlined in the plan
⮚ Modelling of industry operating conditions including real interactions with the person and their carers.
Overall, assessment must involve some real interactions with the person and their families/carers.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
3. Support physical wellbeing
3.1.  Promote and encourage daily living habits that contribute to healthy lifestyle
3.2.  Support and assist the person to maintain a safe and healthy environment
3.3.  Identify hazards and report according to organisation procedures
3.4.  Identify variations in a person’s physical condition and report according to organisation procedures
3.5.  Recognise indications that the person’s physical situation is affecting their wellbeing and report according to organisation procedures
3.6.  Identify physical health situations beyond scope of own role and report to relevant person
3.1 – Promote and encourage daily living habits that contribute to healthy lifestyle
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Explain and exemplify what is involved in healthy lifestyle
⮚ Give examples of methods to promote and encourage daily living habits that will contribute to a person’s healthy lifestyle
⮚ Effectively promote and encourage a specific daily living habit and describe benefits.
What is a healthy lifestyle?
Being healthy is so important for clients receiving care and support. Although it is your clients’ responsibility to ensure their lifestyle is a healthy one, it is your responsibility to help them to find different ways that they can achieve a healthy lifestyle. In order to support the physical well-being of your clients, you will need to promote and encourage daily living habits that will contribute to their overall healthy lifestyle. Ultimately a healthy lifestyle is a particular way of living that can help to maintain and improve your clients’ health and wellbeing. It’s not just about eating right and exercising properly; it is about balancing all the demands of their life in order to achieve good health. After adopting a healthy, balanced lifestyle your clients will be fitter, they will have more energy, their risk of disease will be reduced, and they are more likely to recover. Unfortunately, for many people, a healthy lifestyle is not at the top of their ‘to-do’ list as it’s not always convenient. For clients receiving care and support, a healthy lifestyle is essential in recovering and developing.
Good health and a healthy lifestyle are associated with:
⮚ Making wise choices
⮚ Good mental health
⮚ High self-esteem
⮚ An education about health
⮚ Regular physical fitness
⮚ Good personal hygiene and oral health
⮚ Adequate sleep and relaxation
⮚ Proper nutrition and hydration
⮚ Managing stress effectively
⮚ A safe environment
⮚ Job satisfaction
⮚ Absence of bad habits/addictions
⮚ Feeling valued and appreciated
⮚ Positive social communication.
So, what daily living habits can you promote and encourage your client to do in order to contribute to a healthy lifestyle? Think about the different ways you have helped clients achieve a healthy lifestyle in the past. For example, by booking (and taking them to) dentist and doctor appointments, you will be encouraging them to develop habits that can contribute to a healthy lifestyle.
Other ways to promote and encourage clients to achieve a healthy lifestyle include:
⮚ Nutrition 
⮚ Reducing stress
⮚ Exercising 
⮚ Sleeping
Activity 3A
3.2 – Support and assist the person to maintain a safe and healthy environment
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Explain the importance and benefits of maintaining a safe and healthy environment
⮚ Outline methods to support and assist people to maintain a safe and healthy environment.
Maintaining a safe and healthy environment
In order to ensure that their independence is maximised, your clients will need to maintain a safe and healthy environment. Maintaining their home or surroundings is a part of remaining independent for most people receiving care and support. It helps to keep them busy, take pride in their surroundings and remain in a safe environment. If the individual is struggling to complete everyday household tasks, they should be monitored to determine if they either require support or if there are any cleaning apparatus that could be adapted to make it easier for them.
Environment may include:
⮚ Community centres
⮚ Employment services
⮚ Independent living accommodation
⮚ Person’s own dwelling
⮚ Residential aged care facilities.
A safe and healthy environment refers to an environment that is safe, secure, clean and comfortable. A safe and healthy environment can have psychological benefits for your clients, so it is important that they are encouraged to maintain their environment at all times. Sometimes, when this isn’t possible, you may be required to support and assist them in doing so.
Clean environment
A clean environment is critical in a care and support setting; it is essential to the health of both the workers and the clients. A clean environment can reduce the risks to health and improve client safety too. Your clients have a right to a clean environment, and you should encourage, support and assist them in maintaining their environment.
A clean environment should include:
⮚ Physical cleanliness of surfaces and tools used
⮚ Low risks to health from microorganisms
⮚ Access to safe, clean water
⮚ Access to basic sanitation
⮚ Low risks of cross-contamination
⮚ Low risks of infection
⮚ Safe disposal of waste (particularly high-risk wastes such as needles).
Think about the ways in which your client can maintain a clean environment. How would you need to support and assist them in doing so?
Comfortable environment
A comfortable environment is about ensuring your clients have physical comfort, ease and relaxation. Although this will involve an environment being clean, a comfortable environment is more focused on being free from stress or anxiety.
As well as providing clients with physical comfort, ease and relaxation a comfortable environment should:
⮚ Be free from stress or anxiety
⮚ Be homely
⮚ Create a welcoming atmosphere
⮚ Be clean and safe
⮚ Allow clients to feel secure
⮚ Be pleasant and enjoyable.
The important thing to remember when supporting your clients to maintain a comfortable environment is that ‘comfort’ will be considered differently by the variety of clients you work with. You can help maintain a comfortable environment for your clients by listening to and understanding their specific needs in relation to ‘comfort’ and providing them with the relevant support and assistance.
For example:
⮚ One of your clients feels comfortable in a warm environment; another feels comfortable in a cooler environment
⮚ One client may feel comfortable in a smaller, cosy living environment; another may feel comfortable in a larger, open living environment
⮚ One client may feel comfortable in structured environment with routine and order; another client may feel comfortable in an unstructured environment with more freedom and spontaneity
⮚ One client may feel comfortable in a brightly-lit environment; another may feel comfortable in a dimly-lit environment.
As you can see, it’s about addressing the individual client and their definition of a comfortable environment. You are caring for a client with Dementia. How can you ensure that their environment is comfortable for them? This may involve using signs and labels to help them remember where and what things are. This would put them at ease with their environment and reduce the level of stress and anxiety when they can’t get their bearings or find what they are looking for.
What about clients that can’t see very well? How can you ensure that they feel comfortable within their environment? This could involve making simple, minor adjustments to ensure they don’t get stressed and anxious when needing to read things. For example, how can you make the process of ordering their lunch easier? It can be as simple as providing them will a visual menu that includes pictures of the different options available. This way, they can order their meals stress-free.
the individual to keep their environment safe, clean and tidy will not only help them to maintain their independence but will also help them to remain psychologically healthy. Living in a dirty or messy environment can lead to low self-esteem and depression. Looking after your environment and yourself can help to keep you healthy and give your life purpose and meaning.
Activity 3B
3.3 – Identify hazards and report according to organisation procedures
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ List examples of the types of hazards that may be encountered
⮚ Identify a potential hazard in immediate surroundings and report it in writing.
Identifying hazards
A ‘hazard’ is something with the potential to cause injury or disease to people, damage to property or disruption to productivity.
Hazards can arise from the workplace environment:
⮚ Use of equipment and appliances
⮚ Poor environment layout
⮚ Inappropriate systems and/or procedures
⮚ Human behaviour.
Hazards may include:
⮚ Poor or inappropriate lighting
⮚ Slippery or uneven floor surfaces
⮚ Physical obstructions (e.g. furniture and equipment)
⮚ Poor home and domestic appliance maintenance
⮚ Inadequate heating and cooling devices
⮚ Inappropriate footwear and clothing.
Using these definitions, there are many hazards present in any environment.
Identifying hazards is required in order to:
⮚ Minimise accident or injury
⮚ Eradicate accident or injury
⮚ Protect staff
⮚ Protect clients
⮚ Protect the public
⮚ Ensure smooth operation of the business and care provision.
If you are aware of a hazard, such as a particularly steep staircase, you can take measures to avoid it or be more careful around it. For example, you could use a different staircase or make sure you are very careful using the steep one.
You may identify hazards through your daily working life, such as:
⮚ That staircase is really steep
⮚ There’s a leak coming through the kitchen ceiling
⮚ This chair is wobbly.
You will need to take steps to rectify the problem or manage it more effectively, for example:
⮚ I won’t use that staircase anymore, and I will warn the others that it is steep. Maybe if we ask the management, it will be replaced
⮚ I should report this leak immediately and mop up the water, leaving a ‘caution wet floor’ sign there for others to see
⮚ This chair is broken; I will throw it away. I will have the maintenance man tighten this. I should put it away and inform a manager.
Hazards can pose a risk to anyone that comes into contact with them. Failing to take action or ignoring the problem will leave it for the next person along, who may not realise that the stairs are very steep, that there is water on the floor or that the chair could collapse at any moment.
Many things in the workplace can cause a hazard, especially if they become compromised in some way.
For example, if they are:
⮚ Broken
⮚ Faulty
⮚ Worn out
⮚ Dirty
⮚ Sharp
⮚ Hot
⮚ Wet
⮚ Used improperly.
You have a duty of care and a moral obligation to protect colleagues and clients from hazards; this is why we identify them in our daily lives and have procedures and policies in place to deal with them. Your organisation will have their own policies and procedures for identifying and reporting hazards, so make sure you have the update to date training required and are aware of these procedures.
Activity 3C
3.4 – Identify variations in a person’s physical condition and report according to organisation procedures
3.5 – Recognise indications that the person’s physical situation is affecting their wellbeing and report according to organisation procedures
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Respond accurately and appropriately to a change in a person’s wellbeing and correctly identify any physical conditions or situations that may be having an impact
⮚ Summarise findings in a report that is ready to submit to an organisation.
Clients’ physical condition
Whilst spending time with the client, you should be on the lookout for changes in both their mental and physical state. If you notice that the client’s physical condition has changed in any way, you should keep an eye on it, possibly discuss it with the client and/or their advocate and then report it where necessary.
Variations in a client’s physical condition may include:
⮚ Aches
⮚ Client reporting feeling unwell
⮚ Nail status
⮚ Oral health anomalies
⮚ Pain
⮚ Skin tone and colour
⮚ Weight gain
⮚ Weight loss.
You should not ignore any changes that you see, even if you think the client might get better. It is vital that you understand and know how to complete your organisational report forms regarding incidents, illnesses, etc. Initially, you should contact your supervisor, either by email or telephone and inform them of the matter, before deciding the best course of action to take.
You may find that the client's physical condition is causing them pain, at which point you will need to recognise whether this is affecting their wellbeing.
Signs to look out for could include:
⮚ Not being able to look after themselves
⮚ Confused, upset, sad or depressed
⮚ Extreme fatigue
⮚ Character, humour, etc. has changed
⮚ Not partaking in usual social activities
⮚ Loss of appetite
⮚ Agitated or irritated easily.
Once again, these are things you would need to report, and your organisation will have their own policies and procedures that you will need to strictly follow to ensure this is done correctly and dealt with efficiently.
Activity 3D
3.6 – Identify physical health situations beyond scope of own role and report to relevant person
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify a physical health situation of a person that is beyond the scope of role
⮚ Explain why it is beyond scope of role, methods to deal with the situation, who it should be reported to, and reasons why it should be reported.
Identifying situations beyond your role
You may find that there are instances in which some of your clients’ physical health situations will be beyond the scope of your own role. These are instances where you are faced with a situation that is outside the scope of your own knowledge, skills or job role. Your clients’ particular physical health situation may reach a level that you simply cannot cope with appropriately. If it’s not in your job description, you shouldn’t attempt it. Instead, it’s essential to identify these particular instances so that you can report them to the relevant person and ensure the client receives the care and support that they need.
If you do find yourself faced with a situation that is beyond the scope of your particular role, you will need to report it immediately to the relevant person. This particular person may depend on the situation itself, but you should ensure that you find someone who can deal with it appropriately – it should be within the scope of their particular role.
For example, this person may be:
⮚ Your supervisor
⮚ Your manager
⮚ A doctor
⮚ A health professional
⮚ A fellow colleague.
You noticed one of your clients had lost quite a lot of weight and was looking worryingly thin. After investigating this further, you found out that they stopped bothering to cook hot meals since their partner passed away – they just didn’t see the point. You spoke to your client about the importance of eating hot meals and arranged for a meal-delivery service to deliver them hot meals throughout the week and a family member to come and cook for them at the weekend. They seemed to take everything on board and started enjoying eating new things. It has now been a month, and they still seem to be
losing weight. You think that there is more to it – what should you do? You would need to report to someone who may be able to help.
For example, one of your clients may have recently experienced this with one of their own clients and may be able to offer assistance or advice. Otherwise, you may need to report to your supervisor, manager or even a doctor.
Activity 3E
1. What does a healthy lifestyle involve? Give ten examples.
*
2. Give six examples of the ways that you can promote and encourage daily living habits that will contribute to your clients’ healthy lifestyle.
*
3. Write a short presentation (maximum ten minutes) that identifies one aspect of a healthy lifestyle and explains daily living habits that can positively contribute to it.
*
4. Promote and encourage these daily living habits that contribute to a healthy lifestyle by giving your presentation . Ensure it is no longer than ten minutes, and you speak clearly, concisely and positively to the audience.
Add file
*
5. Why is it important for your clients to maintain a safe and healthy environment? Give five benefits.
*
6. Outline five different ways that you can support and assist clients to maintain a safe and healthy environment.
*
7. Give five examples of the types of hazards you may come across within your job.
*
8. Identify a potential hazard in your current learning environment.
*
9. Imagine that organisational policies and procedures for reporting a hazard include putting concerns into writing. Summarise your findings from Question 2 into a suitable format to be submitted to the organisation.
*
10. Read the following client descriptions and identify any variations in physical condition and situation that may be affecting their wellbeing.     
Summarise your findings in a short report (maximum one page) that could be submitted to a supervisor detailing your concerns.            
Claire - January                           
	Enjoying weekly dinner with parents  
	Phones mum twice a week            
	Walks to the library every Friday
	Researching different recipes to increase intake of fruit and vegetables                 
	Wants to meet up with friends to try out new outfits, hairstyles and nail varnishes         
	Looking forward to the summer months and being outdoors.                                             

Claire - October                                                      
	Claire has moved further away from her parents
	Feeling anxious about the distance      
	Evidence of biting nails and complained of brittleness                                      
	New house does not have appliances yet   
	No fridge to store fresh food    
	Claire mentioned that her clothes do not fit anymore                           
	Looking pale and says she has not explored the new area                                                   
	Got angry when friends were mentioned
	Stomach ache on arrival to meeting.
*
11. Identify a physical health situation of a client that is beyond the scope of your own role and answer the following questions (maximum one page):      
	Why is it beyond the scope of your own role?
	How should you deal with it?       
	Who should you report to?    
	Why should you report to them?