Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to provide individualised services in ways that support independence, as well as, physical and emotional wellbeing.
This unit applies to workers in a range of community services contexts who provide frontline support services within the context of an established individualised plan.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Sector
Not applicable
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
4. Support social, emotional and psychological wellbeing
4.1 Promote self-esteem and confidence through use of positive and supportive communication
4.2 Contribute to the person’s sense of security through use of safe and predictable routines
4.3 Encourage and facilitate participation in social, cultural, spiritual activities, using existing and potential new networks and as per the person’s preferences
4.4 Identify aspects of supporting a person’s wellbeing outside scope of knowledge, skills and/or job role and seek appropriate support
4.5 Identify variations to a person’s wellbeing and report according to organisation procedures
4.6 Identify any cultural or financial issues impacting on the person’s wellbeing
4.7 Identify the person’s risk and protective factors in relation to mental health
4.8 Recognise and report possible indicators of abuse or neglect and report according to organisation procedures
4.9 Identify situations beyond scope of own role and report to relevant person
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be demonstrated evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Safely supported at least 3 people to enhance independence and wellbeing
⮚ Performed the activities outlined in the performance criteria of this unit during a period of at least 120 hours of direct support work in at least one aged care, home and community, disability or community service organisation.
Knowledge Evidence
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in a relevant workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. Where simulation is used it must reflect real working conditions and contingencies by modelling industry operating conditions and contingencies, as well as using suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
⮚ Individualised plans and any relevant equipment outlined in the plan
⮚ Modelling of industry operating conditions including real interactions with the person and their carers.
Overall, assessment must involve some real interactions with the person and their families/carers.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
4. Support social, emotional and psychological wellbeing
4.1.  Promote self-esteem and confidence through use of positive and supportive communication
4.2.  Contribute to the person’s sense of security through use of safe and predictable routines
4.3.  Encourage and facilitate participation in social, cultural, spiritual activities, using existing and potential new networks and as per the person’s preferences
4.4.  Identify aspects of supporting a person’s wellbeing outside scope of knowledge, skills and/or job role and seek appropriate support
4.5.  Identify variations to a person’s wellbeing and report according to organisation procedures
4.6.  Identify variations to a person’s wellbeing and report according to organisation procedures
4.7.  Identify the person’s risk and protective factors in relation to mental health
4.8.  Recognise and report possible indicators of abuse or neglect and report according to organisation procedures
4.9.  Identify situations beyond scope of own role and report to relevant person
4.1 – Promote self-esteem and confidence through use of positive and supportive communication
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Demonstrate how to use positive and supportive communication to promote the self-esteem and confidence of another person.
Promoting self-esteem and confidence
In order to support a client’s emotional and psychological wellbeing, you will need to promote their self- esteem and confidence. As an individual receiving care and support, you can feel a lack of self-worth and powerlessness, especially if you cannot look after yourself as well as you once could.
Part of building a person’s self-esteem is giving them the confidence to achieve their goals and show them that they can accomplish anything they set their mind to. This can be as simple as being able to cook a meal, tend to their garden or walk their dog without any aids. If your client lives in a residential home, it can be harder to give them a sense of freedom and free will, especially if they have carers cooking for them.
Positive and supportive communication
One way of promoting self-esteem and confidence in your clients is through the use of positive and supportive communication. You should communicate in a way that makes them feel as though they can do things, like their opinions matter and like their choices are being heard. You need to demonstrate that you have respect for them, and you have confidence in their thoughts and ideas regarding their own care.
You should never judge; communicate in a way that will empower your clients. Positive and supportive communication is effective when clients are leading their care and support as they feel able to solve their own problems and make their own decisions, whilst having your support too.
Examples of communicating in a positive and supportive way include:
⮚ Giving clients time and space to talk
⮚ Reassuring clients when they need it
⮚ Being helpful
⮚ Being kind and compassionate
⮚ Being optimistic
⮚ Showing encouragement
⮚ Being constructive with your advice.
Activity 4A
4.2 – Contribute to the person’s sense of security through use of safe and predictable routines
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Give benefits and examples of safe and predictable routines
⮚ Help create an individual routine that contributes to their sense of security.
Using safe and predictable routines
Safe and predictable routines can be essential in care and support settings – they provide clients with continuity and structure. This routine, continuity and structure will contribute to their sense of security, as well as providing them with comfort and control. Receiving care and support can be a stressful situation; routine can help clients cope with change and can put them at ease. Clients will strive on familiarity, particularly clients that are suffering with memory loss. Many clients will rely on these routines.
It is important to remember that the safe and predictable routines that you use should be relevant to the client as an individual. You shouldn’t fit the routine around your own schedule – it should be suited to your client. For example, if your client wants to eat their breakfast at 9am, you shouldn’t give it to them at 8am just because it fits better with your plans. Perhaps they already had their own routine before they needed your care and support. How can you continue with their established routine in order to contribute to their sense of security? Did they have any habits that should continue?
Examples of aspects of a safe and predictable routine may include:
⮚ Having a cup of coffee every morning before getting dressed
⮚ Visiting the market every Friday morning to get fresh fruit and vegetables
⮚ Getting into bed at 10pm every night and reading a chapter of their book
⮚ Phoning their daughter every Wednesday evening at 6pm
⮚ Having their shower in an evening rather than a morning
⮚ Doing their ironing on a Tuesday afternoon
⮚ Weekly Bingo trips with friends
⮚ Having their hair cut on the last Friday of the month
⮚ Having fish for dinner on a Saturday
⮚ Reading the local newspaper every morning
⮚ Watching their favourite show on a Monday evening.
Activity 4B
4.3 – Encourage and facilitate participation in social, cultural, spiritual activities, using existing and potential new networks and as per the person’s preferences
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Explain the importance of social interaction and list examples of relevant social, cultural and spiritual activities that can be encouraged
⮚ Create an action plan for a person to encourage and facilitate participation and correctly identify networks to be utilised.
Social activities
You should encourage and facilitate the client’s participation in social activities.
Social interaction can have many benefits
As well as remaining in touch with friends and family and making new friends, clients should be encouraged to participate in social activities.

Cultural and spiritual activities
It is important to facilitate the client’s participation in cultural and spiritual practices and celebrations. If the client is new to the area or perhaps hasn’t had an opportunity to find their nearest cultural or spiritual network, you should ensure you provide them with relevant information regarding such networks in the community.
You should ensure that the client has the correct information regarding the practice or celebration and that they have the correct resources and transport to be able to attend.
Cultural and spiritual practices and celebrations could include:
⮚ Attending place of worship
⮚ Festivals
⮚ Attending weddings, christenings and funerals
⮚ Access to cultural dietary requirements.
You should always support the client’s spiritual and cultural practices as this will help them to maintain their independence and all aspects of their wellbeing.
Spiritual support
Culturally appropriate spiritual support helps people maintain the practices, beliefs and networks that are important to them. First, you must identify the current practices and beliefs of someone in order to help meet their needs. This is not simply asking someone which religion someone follows; this will not give you an in-depth look at their spiritual beliefs. Some religious beliefs require strict compliance with rituals and influence the choices and activities of their everyday life.
Consider also the changing needs of people. Just because someone wasn't interested in spiritual matters in the past does not mean that they won't change their mind – particularly for terminal patients, they take an interest in spirituality near the end of their life, perhaps for comfort. Therefore, a review of spiritual needs is important on a regular basis. Be aware that not all followers of the same religion or speakers of the same language have the same spiritual beliefs or practise the same rituals – treat each person as an individual regarding this.
Whichever activities you are facilitating clients’ participation in; you should do so using existing and potential new networks.
To provide effective spiritual and cultural support, you must:
⮚ Identify, review and support the spiritual needs of clients, carers, their family and/or significant others (including current beliefs and practices)

Activity 4C
4.4 – Identify aspects of supporting a person’s wellbeing outside scope of knowledge, skills and/or job role and seek appropriate support
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Outline essential aspects of supporting a person’s wellbeing that is outside scope of knowledge, skills and/or job role
⮚ Describe methods to deal with this scenario and identify available support.
Things outside of your own scope of knowledge, skills and/or job role
You may find that there are aspects of supporting a client’s wellbeing that are outside the scope of your knowledge, skills and/or job role. This means you are faced with an aspect of their support that you don’t feel able to provide. This may be because it is not in your job description, you are not adequately qualified, or you don’t have the necessary skills, knowledge or experience.
If something is outside the scope of your job role, knowledge or skills, you should not attempt it. This could leave your client unsatisfied, or you or the client hurt (physically or mentally). It is important to be able to identify these aspects so you can seek the appropriate support and ensure that the client receives the care and support that they need. You should never ignore something – if you are unable to provide an aspect of support, you should find someone who is. Feeling able to seek support when you need it is a good quality to have, and it can lead to all-around better care for your clients.
For example, if they have a certain cultural or spiritual need that you are unfamiliar with, it may be a good idea to seek the support of someone that is knowledgeable. This
will ensure that the client still receives the necessary support for their wellbeing.
What about a client needing emotional support? They may need to talk about their memories or may be experiencing grief or depression. If you are not able to provide the necessary support, you should seek the appropriate support. For example, a counsellor will be able to support your client better than you could.
If you do find yourself with aspects that are beyond the scope of your knowledge, skills or particular role, you will need to act on it immediately. This may involve reporting it or seeking the relevant support – find someone who can deal with it appropriately.
For example, this person may be:
⮚ Your supervisor
⮚ Your manager
⮚ A doctor
⮚ A health professional
⮚ A fellow colleague.
Activity 4D
4.5 – Identify variations to a person’s wellbeing and report according to organisation procedures
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Correctly identify a variation in a person’s wellbeing and report it to a supervisor.
Variations to a client’s wellbeing
Whilst providing clients with care and support, you will have the chance to get to know them as an individual. You will get to know about their character, their behaviour and their mood. This also means that you will be able to notice any changes that occur and identify any variations in their wellbeing.
Variations to a client’s wellbeing may include:
⮚ Loss of appetite
⮚ Change in character
⮚ Depressed
⮚ Sad, upset, always crying
⮚ Confused
⮚ Extreme fatigue
⮚ Agitated or irritated easily.
Whenever you notice a variation in a client’s wellbeing, you should report it according to your organisation’s procedures. You should ensure that you are aware of the way that you should report these variations. This may mean you have to report it to your supervisor or manager.
Activity 4E
4.6 – Identify any cultural or financial issues impacting on the person’s wellbeing
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ List examples of cultural and financial issues that may impact the wellbeing of an individual
⮚ Outline methods to recognise issues and the necessary steps to take to help protect a person’s wellbeing.
Cultural issues
You may find that a client’s wellbeing will be impacted by cultural issues.
All of the above issues could affect a client’s wellbeing, making them feel sad, upset or depressed. It is your job to identify if and when these issues arise.
Financial issues
You will also need to identify any financial issues that may be impacting the client’s wellbeing.
Financial issues may include:
⮚ The inability to pay their rent or bills
⮚ The inability to pay for their care and support
⮚ The inability to pay for food
⮚ Complicated benefits
⮚ Victim of financial abuse or fraud
⮚ The inability to provide for their family
⮚ Job loss
⮚ Non-existent savings.
A financial issue can have a detrimental effect on a client – it can be very stressful, and they may become worried. By identifying any cultural or financial issues that are impacting on the client’s wellbeing, you will be able to ensure that they addressed correctly, and they receive the correct support.
Activity 4F
4.7 – Identify the person’s risk and protective factors in relation to mental health
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Define risk and protective factors and exemplify in relation to a person’s mental health.
Risk and protective factors
Good mental health is essential for clients that are receiving care and support – particularly those striving to be independent and take control of their care and support. Good mental health can help your clients cope with change, solve problems that arise and achieve their goals and potential.
Poor mental health can have a major impact on your clients and their care and support. It can disrupt their life and hinder their ability to function. It can change your clients’ mood, cause chronic anxiety and lead to impulsive actions.
It is important to identify clients’ risk and protective factors in relation to mental health. Although no single factor can be guaranteed to be related to mental health, they are often correlated with mental health and should be identified. Although it won’t be an extensive list, this chapter will provide you with examples of risk and protective factors that may relate to mental health. Factors will vary depending on clients; keep your own clients in mind. By identifying these risk and protective factors, you will be able to predict clients’ chances of developing mental health issues and may be able to prevent them occurring and provide the appropriate interventions.
Risk factors are internal or external conditions that increase a client’s likelihood of developing a mental health problem.
Risk factors can include:
⮚ Low intelligence
⮚ Chronic illness
⮚ Experiencing trauma
⮚ Low self-esteem
⮚ Poor social skills
⮚ Difficult temperament
⮚ Death of a family member
⮚ Poor physical health
⮚ Abuse and/or neglect
⮚ Discrimination based on community values and attitudes, including myths and stereotypes
⮚ Socio-economic disadvantage.
Protective factors are internal or external conditions that decrease a client’s likelihood of developing a mental health problem whilst promoting resiliencies.
Protective factors may include:
⮚ Strong cultural identity and ethnic pride
⮚ Attachment to community networks
⮚ Participation in church or other community group
⮚ Supportive, caring friends and family
⮚ Economic security
⮚ Good physical health
⮚ Moral beliefs
⮚ Good coping style
⮚ Social skills
⮚ Optimism
⮚ Above average intelligence.
Activity 4G
4.8 – Recognise and report possible indicators of abuse or neglect and report according to organisation procedures
4.9 – Identify situations beyond scope of own role and report to relevant person
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify the seven types of abuse or neglect and exemplify
⮚ Respond appropriately to an indicator of abuse or neglect which is beyond scope of role and report it to a supervisor.
Abuse and neglect
Abuse is any instance where someone takes advantage of a client and neglect is any instance where someone fails to care for a client properly.
It can include:
⮚ Financial exploitation – this is the unauthorised use of a client’s money or their property by either a caregiver or an external party
The types of practices include:
o stealing money
o forging cheques/credit cards/accounts
⮚ Physical abuse – this is the deliberate use of force on a client,
causing them pain, injury or disability. It includes violent assaults, using drugs (inappropriately), restraining them or keeping them captive
⮚ Emotional abuse – also known as psychological abuse, this involves treating clients in any way that causes them distress or emotional pain
This can include:
o verbal abuse – threats, intimidation, yelling, humiliation, placing blame
o non-verbal abuse – ignoring, social isolation, terrorising behaviour
⮚ Sexual abuse – this includes contact with a client without their consent; this can mean physical sex acts but also includes making them watch sex acts, pornography, or forcing them to undress
⮚ Neglect/abandonment – this includes failure to fulfil carer duties and is responsible for over half of client abuse cases. It can be intentional or unintentional, based on ignorance or denial of the care requirements for the client
⮚ Healthcare fraud – this can be committed by care providers or medical personnel; it includes:
o charging for healthcare they don't provide
o overcharging for services
o taking 'kickbacks' (bonuses) for referring clients to providers of certain drugs
o over/under-medicating
o recommending incorrect/fraudulent remedies for medical conditions/illnesses
o Medicare Fraud
Signs of abuse and neglect
Symptoms can be difficult to recognise, particularly in older clients as they may mirror those of dementia or frailty. It can be easy for people to explain the signs and many people may dismiss them as a minor issue. However, you should not believe a caregiver at face value and investigate if you are at all concerned.
The following are things you should be on the lookout for:
General abuse
⮚ Arguments (frequent) between client and caregiver
⮚ Changes in personality of the client
⮚ Odd behaviour.
Physical abuse
⮚ Unexplained injuries
⮚ Broken bones/sprains/dislocations
⮚ Medication irregularities
⮚ Broken glasses
⮚ Signs of restraint
⮚ Caregiver refuses to let client be seen alone.
Emotional abuse
⮚ Experience of threatening, bullying or controlling behaviour from caregiver
⮚ Dementia-like behaviour from client – rocking, mumbling, sucking thumb.
Sexual abuse
⮚ Bruises around genitals
⮚ Unexplained genital infections or STDs
⮚ Unexplained vaginal/anal bleeding
⮚ Torn/stained clothing.
Neglect
⮚ Weight loss, malnutrition, dehydration
⮚ Being left unclean
⮚ Untreated physical problems
⮚ Unsuitable clothing for the conditions
⮚ Unsanitary or unsafe living conditions
⮚ Desertion in a public place.
Financial exploitation
⮚ Unexplained withdrawals from client’s accounts
⮚ Sudden changes in financial situation
⮚ Missing items/cash from the client’s house

Healthcare fraud
⮚ Duplicate medical bills
⮚ Evidence of over/under-medication
⮚ Evidence of inadequate care pertaining to the amount paid
⮚ Problems in the care facility.
Acting on abuse and neglect
There are three things you must do to prevent client abuse and neglect:
⮚ Listen to clients and caregivers
⮚ Intervene when you suspect abuse
⮚ Educate others on how to identify and report abuse.
As a caregiver, you can do the following if you are overwhelmed by the demands:
⮚ Request help from colleagues, friends and family (of the client)
⮚ Maintain your own health
⮚ Seek help for any substance abuse
⮚ Contact client abuse helplines.
If you suspect any kind of client abuse or neglect, the main thing you need to do is report it to the appropriate person – this can include any of the following:

If a situation arises that is beyond the scope of your own role, you should ensure that you deal with it effectively. It is essential that it is reported to the relevant person in order to ensure your client receives the care and support that they need.
Activity 4H
1. Label yourselves Person A  in Task 1 and Person B in Task 2.                                                                     
Task 1                                                                
Person B is the client and Person A is the worker. Person A needs to demonstrate how they can use positive and supportive communication to promote the self-esteem and confidence of Person B.  

Task 2                                                           
Person A is the client and Person B is the worker. Person B needs to demonstrate how they can use positive and supportive communication to promote the self-esteem and confidence of Person A.
*
2. Give five reasons why it is important to use safe and predictable routines.
*
3. Give ten examples of different aspects of a safe and predictable routine.
*
4.	Imagine a client’s sense of security is based on the following activities:          
	Reading      
	Going to the cinema       
	Getting dressed by 9am  
	Phoning parents once a week  
	Playing chess against a computer    
	Praying on Sunday mornings      
	Brushing teeth three times a day    
	Doing the ironing on Sunday afternoons.         
Create a basic weekly schedule that incorporates all of these activities to help contribute to the client’s sense of security.
*
5. Give seven benefits of social interaction.
*
6. List five examples of different social activities that you could encourage your clients to participate in.
*
7. Give three examples of cultural and spiritual activities that you could encourage your clients to participate in.
*
8. Create an action plan for the client outlined in Activity 4B to encourage and facilitate participation in new social, cultural and spiritual activities. Highlight networks that will need to be used.
*
9. Outline three aspects of supporting a client’s wellbeing that would be outside of the scope of your knowledge, skills and/or job role.
*
10. Briefly describe how you would deal with this and what support you would seek (maximum 100 words).
*
11. Give five examples of cultural issues that may impact on the wellbeing of your clients.
*
12. Give five examples of financial issues that may impact on the wellbeing of your clients.
*
13. Choose one cultural issue and one financial issue identified in your examples from the previous questions. Outline how you may recognise these issues and the steps you would take to help protect the person’s wellbeing (maximum 150 words).
*
14. What are risk factors? (Maximum 50 words)
*
15. Give eight examples of risk factors of clients in relation to mental health.

*
16. What are protective factors? (Maximum 50 words)
*
17. Give eight examples of protective factors of clients in relation to mental health.
*
18. Give seven types of different abuse or neglect with one example warning sign for each.
*
19. Imagine you have identified bruising to the arm of one of your clients. Give three different possible organisational methods for dealing with this situation
*