Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to work respectfully with people from diverse social and cultural groups and situations, including Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people.
This unit applies to all workers.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
1. Reflect on own perspectives
1.1 Identify and reflect on own social and cultural perspectives and biases
1.2 Work with awareness of own limitations in self and social awareness
1.3 Use reflection to support own ability to work inclusively and with understanding of others
1.4 Identify and act on ways to improve own self and social awareness
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Undertaken a structured process to reflect on own perspectives on diversity
⮚ Recognised and respected the needs of people from diverse social and cultural backgrounds in at least 3 different situations:
o selected and used appropriate verbal and non-verbal communication
o recognised situations where misunderstandings may arise from diversity and formed appropriate responses.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Concepts of cultural awareness, cultural safety and cultural competence and how these impact different work roles
⮚ Concepts and definitions of diversity
⮚ Own culture and the community attitudes, language, policies and structures of that culture and how they impact on different people and groups
⮚ Features of diversity in Australia and how this impacts different areas of work and life:
o political
o social
o economic
o cultural
⮚ Legal and ethical considerations (international, national, state/territory, local) for working with diversity, how these impact individual workers, and the consequences of breaches:
o discrimination:
▪  age
▪  disability
▪  racial
▪  sex
o human rights:
▪  Universal declaration of human rights
▪  relationship between human needs and human rights
▪  frameworks, approaches and instruments used in the workplace
o rights and responsibilities of workers, employers and clients, including appropriate action when rights are being infringed or responsibilities not being carried out
⮚ Key areas of diversity and their characteristics, including:
o culture, race, ethnicity
o disability
o religious or spiritual beliefs
o gender, including transgender
o intersex
o generational
o sexual orientation/sexual identity - lesbian, gay, bisexual, heterosexual
⮚ Key aspects, and the diversity, of Australia’s Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander cultures, including:
o social, political and economic issues affecting Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people
o own culture, western systems and structures and how these impact on Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people and their engagement with services
⮚ Potential needs of marginalised groups, including:
o protective factors
o physical, mental and emotional health issues/care needs
o consideration of impacts of discrimination, trauma, exclusion and negative attitudes
⮚ Resources that support individuals and organisations to embrace and respond to diversity
o language and cultural interpreters
o imagery
⮚ Influences and changing practices in Australia and their impact on the diverse communities that make up Australian society
⮚ Impact of diversity practices and experiences on personal behaviour, interpersonal relationships, perception and social expectations of others.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. Where simulation is used, it must reflect real working conditions by modelling industry operating conditions and contingencies, as well as, using suitable facilities, equipment and resources.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
1. Reflect on your own perspectives
1.1.  Identify and reflect on own social and cultural perspectives and biases
1.2.  Work with awareness of own limitations in self and social awareness
1.3.  Use reflection to support own ability to work inclusively and with understanding of others
1.4.  Identify and act on ways to improve own self and social awareness
1.1 – Identify and reflect on own social and cultural perspectives and biases
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Discuss and document own potential social and cultural perspectives and biases.
Diversity
Australia is a diverse country, including people from many different social, cultural or religious backgrounds. In order to succeed in the workplace, you will need to work respectfully with them.
Diversity may include:
⮚ Ethnicity
⮚ Race
⮚ Language
⮚ Cultural norms and values
⮚ Religion
⮚ Beliefs and customs
⮚ Kinship and family structure and relationships
⮚ Gender and gender relationships
⮚ Age
⮚ Disability
⮚ Sexuality
⮚ Personal history and experience, which may have been traumatic
⮚ Special needs.
Culture, race, ethnicity
When most people think of diversity, they associate it with people from other countries; however, this issue is more nuanced than you may expect.
Aspects may include:
⮚ Culture: A person’s way of life, including their customs and beliefs. This influences how they think, behave, work and conduct themselves in all aspects of life
⮚ Race: A person’s biological or genetic group, which is most often determined by their skin colour but can also be influenced by hair, eye colour and bone structure. Note that despite historical ideas, race has no influence on intelligence
⮚ Ethnicity: A person’s identification with a social or cultural group based on shared experiences, tradition or nationality. They may also share languages, history or religion.
Consider a person whose family had always lived in Japan but emigrated to Australia soon after they were born. Their race would be Japanese, but ethnically they may be likely to identify as Australian as that is what they have known. Culturally, the person would be influenced by whoever they grew up around, including their family, friends, neighbours and colleagues. Therefore, they may adopt ways of life that are traditionally Australian, Japanese or other cultures.
In today’s world, people can move between cultures more quickly. As a result of immigration, relocation, cultural change and heritage, people can experience and identify with several cultures over their lifetime. This is known as multiculturalism. They may identify with one or more of the cultures to varying degrees and classify them in different ways. For example, a person born in Japan and now living in Australia may describe themselves as Japanese, Australian, Japanese-Australian, Asian or a global citizen. This could be reflected in their practices, beliefs, languages and values.
(Sources: http://www.diffen.com/difference/Ethnicity_vs_Race, http://www.merriam- webster.com/dictionary/culture )
Disability
A disability is a physical or mental limit to a person’s abilities. A person may be either born with a disability or acquire in it later life as the result of an accident or illness.
Types of disabilities include:
⮚ Mobility and physical impairments
⮚ Spinal cord disabilities
⮚ Head or brain injuries
⮚ Vision issues
⮚ Hearing issues
⮚ Cognitive or learning disabilities
⮚ Psychological disorders
⮚ Invisible disabilities.

Source: http://www.racismnoway.com.au/about-racism/population/index-Diversit-3.html (Accessed 03.16.19)
People may also have personal spiritual beliefs which are no less valid than organised religions. Aboriginal Australian spirituality is commonly referred to as the Dreaming or Dreamtime. While there are many different religions among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, they share a common belief that the land and all natural things possess living souls.
Gender
Gender is how people view themselves, either male or female. Note that while sex is biological, gender is cultural or social. While the majority of people identify as the gender, they were born as some people
may identify as the opposite one, and are known as transgender. This may be expressed as taking an appropriate name, wearing clothes of the opposite gender or having sex-change operations.
Note that people who identify as bi-gender fluctuate between the behaviours and identities of both genders, and people who identify as androgynous have aspects of both genders.
The term intersex issued to describe people whose biology doesn’t clearly fit into either gender. There is a wide amount of biological variation within this. People may not realise they are intersex until puberty or even later.
Source: http://www.isna.org/faq/what_is_intersex (Accessed 03.06.19)
Generational
One unappreciated area of diversity is generations. For example, employees may be parents, grandparents or currently live with their parents. This will affect a range of factors including their possible work schedules, attitudes, obligations and health.
People in Australian society are often divided by age into general categories, including:
⮚ Teenagers/millennials.
⮚ Young married couples
⮚ Generation X
⮚ Vietnam veterans
⮚ Older people
⮚ Retirees
⮚ Baby boomers.
There often negative stereotypes associated with different generations, such as teenagers are workshy, and older people have no skills with technology. Try to ignore them and treat the people as individuals. Also, be aware of the different issues that will affect them; for example, young people are more likely to be concerned about education or finding a part-time job, while middle-aged people may be concerned about caring for children and saving up for retirement.
Sexual orientation
A person’s sexual orientation is who they are sexually attracted to. It is commonly divided into heterosexual (opposite sex), homosexual (same sex) or bisexual (both sexes.) Although a person’s
orientation rarely causes issues in the workplace, other people may take offence to it and discriminate against them because of it. This is known as homophobia.
Also, be aware that some people are asexual and how little or no sexual attraction to either gender.
Source: http://itspronouncedmetrosexual.com/2013/01/a-comprehensive-list-of-lgbtq-term- definitions/ (Accessed 03.06.19)
Indigenous Australians
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are not a homogenous group – they are diverse and culturally different within themselves and have unique customs, cultural beliefs, languages, family structures and ceremonies. This may mean adapting what you offer and how you behave to meet their needs and preferences.
Depending on the impact of European colonisation, there will have been varying amounts of loss of culture. For the devout, traditional values and customs guide their everyday living; for those of mixed descent or who have integrated into mainstream society, their influences will feature all aspects of both cultures.
Human rights
Human rights are the universal rights which all people are entitled to. If you cannot resolve a case of discrimination or racial hatred personally, you need to make a complaint (in writing) to the Australian Human Rights Commission. It should detail what happened, when and where it happened and who was involved. The commission will then attempt to resolve the complaint through conciliation – an informal process that facilitates talking about the issues and resolving them. If this is unsuccessful, the complaint can be moved to the Federal Court of Australia or the Federal Magistrates Court.
The United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples states that they have the right:
⮚ To self-determination
⮚ To freely pursue one’s economic, social and cultural development
⮚ To maintain and develop one’s own political, religious, cultural and educational institutions
⮚ Against genocide, acts of violence and forcible removal
⮚ Against forced assimilation or destruction of one’s culture
⮚ To use and control lands, territories and other natural resources
⮚ To the protection of one’s cultural and intellectual property
⮚ To practice and revitalize one’s customs and spiritual, cultural, ceremonial and religious traditions
⮚ Equal access to all social and health services (highest attainable standard of physical and mental health)
⮚ To prior and informed consultation, participation and consent in activities of any kind that impact on indigenous peoples, their property or territories
⮚ To equality and freedom from any kind of discrimination.
The Racial Discrimination Act 1975 ensures that Australians of all backgrounds are treated equally and afforded the same opportunities.
It is against the law to treat people of any race, colour, descent, national or ethnic origin, and immigration status unfairly (on the basis of these qualities).
The areas of life that the Act applies to are:
⮚ Employment – if you have been:
o refused employment
o dismissed
o denied a promotion, transfer or other employment-related benefits
o given less favourable terms or conditions of employment
o denied equal access to training opportunities
o selected for redundancy
o harassed
⮚ Education
⮚ Accommodation
⮚ Accessing public services
⮚ Accessing public services
⮚ Harassment.
Social perspectives and biases
A person’s social perspective is how they view the world around them. It is learned as a result of their experiences and influences, such as family and friends. They may view some aspects of society more positively or negatively than others. For example, if a person was robbed by someone of a particular ethnic group, they may start to assume all members of that group are criminals.
Bias may manifest in various ways, including:
⮚ Discrimination
⮚ Social avoidance
⮚ Preferential or unfair workplace treatment
⮚ Stereotyping
⮚ Racial or offensive language/slurs
⮚ Dictating clothes based on gender
⮚ Not allowing people to practice their religion/faith.
Bias often comes from fear or hatred of a particular group, usually caused by misunderstandings and lack of knowledge. People are often influenced by stereotypes they hear from others or the media.
Discrimination
Discrimination is when an individual or group is treated unfairly due to a prejudiced view, such as unjust treatment on the grounds of age/sex/race. You should be aware of these so that you can avoid inadvertently doing them.
Direct discrimination is discrimination that is easy to pinpoint. It may be evidenced in a particular event or interaction, such as if a person is refused service due to their age/gender/race, etc. or if a job candidate with the best qualifications is refused an interview on the grounds of age/gender/race, etc.
Indirect discrimination is discrimination which may be completely unintended. It will be a rule which applies to everyone equally, which puts people from certain groups, lifestyles or backgrounds at a disadvantage. For example, if a business has a rule which states that all men must be clean-shaven, this may be considered indirect discrimination, as this may be a conflict with the religious requirements of men from certain religious backgrounds.
Identifying and reflecting on bias
Often biases are unconscious, and we act on them without thinking. To identify the bias, you need to become conscious of them. One method of doing this is using word association to describe various people. Write down the first thing that comes to mind and try to resist editing your response or the
exercise won’t be valuable. You don’t have to share the results with anyone else. If you can’t think of any response after five seconds, move onto the next one.
Cues for the word associate may include:
⮚ A person with crutches
⮚ An Aboriginal man
⮚ A gay couple
⮚ An immigrant who doesn’t speak English
⮚ A single parent with lots of children
⮚ A Muslim man wearing religious clothes
⮚ A woman with a mental disability.
You could adapt the cues for people you are likely to encounter in your role, or have another person suggest them.
Continue to identify your thoughts whenever you meet someone of a different race, culture, sexuality, religion or gender. Ask yourself why you think this way and whether it’s fair. Try to determine where the thoughts originated from, such as a bad experience or the attitudes of those around you.
Source: https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/20140718195048-28337096-unconscious-bias-and-blind- spots-self-reflection (Accessed 03.06.19)
Activity 1A
1.2 – Work with awareness of own limitations in self and social awareness
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Explain how one social or cultural perspective or bias may affect their work in a negative way and suggest how to prevent this from happening.
Limitations in awareness
In the previous exercise, you will have identified where there are limitations to your self- and social- awareness. You should carry this forward whenever you are interacting with people different from yourselves.
You should always try to be aware that:
⮚ There may be subjects of which you don’t have sufficient or up-to-date knowledge
⮚ Other people may have different perspectives to you; what is ‘common sense’ may vary according to who you are talking to
⮚ People have social biases of their own
⮚ Society changes and what is considered a bias will evolve.
Social awareness may include:
⮚ Various groups’ history
⮚ Groups’ current situation and the issues facing them now
⮚ Common ways of life and values within the group
⮚ Taboos and offensive topics to the group.
You may need to research issues for each group that you commonly come into contact with. Otherwise, you could come across as ignorant or offensive to a member of the group.
Case Study
For example, Aboriginal Australians may have a mistrust of government bodies which will affect their engagement with services. This stems from systematic persecution by governments, in which their land and children were taken away. In the Lost Generation, thousands of Aboriginal children were removed from their families under the pretence of foster care.
Issues which are more likely to affect them include:
⮚ Physical health problems, such as:
o heart disease
o alcohol or drug (AOD) problems
o violence
⮚ Mental health problems, such as:
o unresolved trauma
o depression
⮚ Incarceration
⮚ Emotional health problems, such as:
o identity crisis
o feelings of grief and loss
⮚ Lack of political representation.
Source: https://www.beyondblue.org.au/who-does-it-affect/aboriginal-and-torres-strait-islander- people/risk-factors (Accessed 03.06.19)
Activity 1B
1.3 – Use reflection to support own ability to work inclusively and with understanding of others
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Explain what is meant by non-judgemental practice
⮚ Write a summary of how to use the results of personal reflection to ensure work is inclusive and understanding of others.
Reflecting on abilities
During interactions with clients or other employees in the workplace, you should refrain from imposing your values, beliefs or attitudes on them. It is important to maintain non-judgemental practice. This means you don’t make moral judgements (e.g. “That is wrong or immoral”) that don’t affect the person’s wellbeing.
Values and beliefs may come from:
⮚ Religions followed by you, your family and your community
⮚ Culture and traditions
⮚ Life events
⮚ Employment
⮚ Education
⮚ Media
⮚ Lifestyle choices
⮚ Political beliefs.
In order to remain non-judgemental, you may need to reflect on your own beliefs and analyse which ones may affect how you treat people. A common fallacy is thinking “Everyone believes the same as me; this is common sense.”
For example, you are a vegetarian and believe it is wrong to eat meat. However, a client who is not vegetarian asks you for help in creating a healthy meal plan. You shouldn’t force your beliefs on them, and instead, respect their wishes by creating one that is suitable for them. Consider how you would feel if someone spoke out against your beliefs when it was irrelevant to your wellbeing.
To provide non-judgemental practice, you should ensure that you:
⮚ Consider where your beliefs and values come from
⮚ Analyse the consequences of what you say (e.g. “Will it hurt the person’s feelings or seem insensitive?”)
⮚ Determine whether your beliefs are relevant to the person’s wellbeing.
Activity 1C
1.4 – Identify and act on ways to improve own self and social awareness
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ List ways to improve themselves and their social awareness
⮚ Research, identify, and provide details of professional opportunities to improve your own self and social awareness.
Improving on awareness
There are a number of ways that you can improve your self- or social awareness of diversity. You should identify ones that are relevant to your work situation and arrange to undertake them.
Strategies to improve bias include:
⮚ Cross-cultural work teams
⮚ Cross-cultural employee representation on committees
⮚ Workplace free of culturally insensitive literature, posters, signage
⮚ Inclusion in decision-making.
Cross-cultural teams are ones that include people from a wide variety of backgrounds participate in the same team. To work in one, it is important to have a fair attitude towards all of them and communicate with people of different nationalities. You will find yourself becoming more aware of different cultures and their dynamics. Working closely with people will also give you more respect and understanding of them.
Source: http://www.go-maritime.net/working-and-living-at-sea/cross-cultural-teams/ (Accessed 03.06.19)
Professional development opportunities
Professional development opportunities are opportunities for improving perspective provided by the organisation. They may help you to work more inclusively with people.
These may include:
⮚ Coaching/mentoring
⮚ Skills training
⮚ Professional development schemes/initiatives
⮚ Support and/or sponsorship towards new professional qualifications
⮚ Attendance at events within the industry, e.g. conferences/networking events
⮚ Opportunities to take on more responsibility, e.g. leading a team project.
These opportunities should be available to all and offered based on merit and work performance or necessity, rather than given preferentially to persons of a particular age/gender/race, etc.
Professional development opportunities can be identified by evaluating which tasks, schemes, training and events will have a positive impact on the personal and career development of an individual. It must then be ensured that everybody within the organisation has equal opportunity to benefit from these and that they are made accessible to those members of the workgroup with specific needs.
Activity 1D
Summative Assessments
At the end of your Learner Workbook, you will find the Summative Assessments. This includes:
⮚ Skills assessment
⮚ Knowledge assessment
⮚ Performance assessment.
This holistically assesses your understanding and application of the skills, knowledge and performance requirements for this unit. Once this is completed, you will have finished this unit and be ready to move onto the next one – well done!
Appendices
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Preamble 
The General Assembly,
Proclaims this Universal Declaration of Human Rights as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, to the end that every individual and every organ of society, keeping this Declaration constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education to promote respect for these rights and freedoms and by progressive measures, national and international, to secure their universal and effective recognition and observance, both among the peoples of Member States themselves and among the peoples of territories under their jurisdiction.

1. Briefly describe what is meant by non-judgemental practice and give six areas that may affect your values.
*
2. List three ways you can improve yourself and your social awareness
*
3. Research and identify two professional opportunities within your organisation or in your local area that you can act upon to improve own self and social awareness. Provide details of each opportunity that you identify, e.g. cost, location, time, duration, etc.