Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
2. Appreciate diversity and inclusiveness, and their benefits
2.1 Value and respect diversity and inclusiveness across all areas of work
2.2 Contribute to the development of workplace and professional relationships based on appreciation of diversity and inclusiveness
2.3 Use work practices that make environments safe for all
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Undertaken a structured process to reflect on own perspectives on diversity
⮚ Recognised and respected the needs of people from diverse social and cultural backgrounds in at least 3 different situations:
o selected and used appropriate verbal and non-verbal communication
o recognised situations where misunderstandings may arise from diversity and formed appropriate responses.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Concepts of cultural awareness, cultural safety and cultural competence and how these impact different work roles
⮚ Concepts and definitions of diversity
⮚ Own culture and the community attitudes, language, policies and structures of that culture and how they impact on different people and groups
⮚ Features of diversity in Australia and how this impacts different areas of work and life:
o political
o social
o economic
o cultural
⮚ Legal and ethical considerations (international, national, state/territory, local) for working with diversity, how these impact individual workers, and the consequences of breaches:
o discrimination:
▪  age
▪  disability
▪  racial
▪  sex
o human rights:
▪  Universal declaration of human rights
▪  relationship between human needs and human rights
▪  frameworks, approaches and instruments used in the workplace
o rights and responsibilities of workers, employers and clients, including appropriate action when rights are being infringed or responsibilities not being carried out
⮚ Key areas of diversity and their characteristics, including:
o culture, race, ethnicity
o disability
o religious or spiritual beliefs
o gender, including transgender
o intersex
o generational
o sexual orientation/sexual identity - lesbian, gay, bisexual, heterosexual
⮚ Key aspects, and the diversity, of Australia’s Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander cultures, including:
o social, political and economic issues affecting Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people
o own culture, western systems and structures and how these impact on Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people and their engagement with services
⮚ Potential needs of marginalised groups, including:
o protective factors
o physical, mental and emotional health issues/care needs
o consideration of impacts of discrimination, trauma, exclusion and negative attitudes
⮚ Resources that support individuals and organisations to embrace and respond to diversity
o language and cultural interpreters
o imagery
⮚ Influences and changing practices in Australia and their impact on the diverse communities that make up Australian society
⮚ Impact of diversity practices and experiences on personal behaviour, interpersonal relationships, perception and social expectations of others.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. Where simulation is used, it must reflect real working conditions by modelling industry operating conditions and contingencies, as well as, using suitable facilities, equipment and resources.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3- bd22cc4f1e53
2. Appreciate diversity and inclusiveness, and their benefits
2.1. Value and respect diversity and inclusiveness across all areas of work
2.2.  Contribute to the development of work place and professional relationships based on appreciation of diversity and inclusiveness
2.3. Use work practices that make environments safe for all
2.1 – Value and respect diversity and inclusiveness across all areas of work
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify benefits of diversity in the workplace
⮚ Give examples of how to respect diversity in all areas of work
⮚ Provide examples of inclusive principles.
Diversity and inclusiveness
Diversity has benefits in the workplace. It allows people from different backgrounds with various skills to contribute.
For example, in a customer service organisation, having people of different cultures can allow them to relate easier to a wider range of customers.
Benefits of diversity include:
⮚ Creativity increases due to different ideas, attitudes and experiences
⮚ Language and cultural skills enable the organisation to operate in foreign countries
⮚ Bringing in innovations from other cultures
⮚ Encouraging people from all backgrounds to join the organisation
⮚ Greater cross-fertilisation of ideas
⮚ Improved client service, both internal and external
⮚ Promotion of equity and fairness
⮚ Improved access for clients from diverse backgrounds to government services and programs
⮚ Improved relationship with the community and wider sources of recruitment
⮚ Greater responsiveness to change
⮚ Cultural enrichment
⮚ A workforce representative of the client base
⮚ A balanced workforce in terms of age, gender, race and culture.
Source: http://www.ethnoconnect.com/articles/9-business-advantages-of-diversity-in-the-work- place (Accessed 03.06.19)
You can respect diversity by:
⮚ Acknowledging its importance in the workplace
⮚ Supporting initiatives to promote and utilise diversity
⮚ Encouraging inclusive hiring practices
⮚ Getting to know others in the workplace and their experiences/potential
⮚ Writing a vision statement regarding your attitudes to adversity
⮚ Avoiding broad generalisations.
A diverse workforce is better suited to the needs of a diverse client base and also benefits the organisation and individual work members by creating an atmosphere of tolerance, difference and innovation.
How your organisation views the value of diversity, and its benefits may be outlined in its mission, vision and values statement and/or diversity policy. These materials can help you pinpoint precisely how diversity has a positive impact on your particular organisation.
Inclusiveness
A workplace that is inclusive makes all its employees feel welcome, regardless of their race, religion, disabilities or sexuality.
Behaviour that is inclusive will ensure that all work members are involved in relevant work tasks without discrimination. For example, a work meeting that is supposed to include all members of a work team should not exclude team members due to age/race/gender, etc.
In order to provide a role model for others, inclusive behaviour would be demonstrated through making sure that all work members are invited to be involved in all relevant tasks and that all opinions are taken into account, regardless of the personal circumstances, lifestyle or background of team members.
Inclusiveness is the principle of:
⮚ Giving all people opportunities
⮚ Ensuring there are open channels for communication so all people can provide feedback
⮚ Social activities are inclusive; for example, sporting or alcohol-related activities may not be suitable for everyone
⮚ Acknowledging diverse celebration days (e.g. Gay Pride, International Day of Persons with Disabilities)
⮚ Using language that doesn’t assume heterosexuality (e.g. ‘partner’ instead of ‘husband/wife’)
⮚ Make allowances for allow religion’s praying, food and clothing requirements.
You should also ensure that harassment and bullying over these issues is not tolerated within the workplace, and that when they do occur, they are dealt with swiftly. Not resolving issues sends the message that they are acceptable and will encourage people in future.
Source: http://hrcouncil.ca/hr-toolkit/diversity-supportive-environment.cfm (Source 03.06.19)
Activity 2A
2.2 – Contribute to the development of workplace and professional relationships based on appreciation of diversity and inclusiveness
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Give examples of how to coach others to develop professional relationships
⮚ Create a training presentation giving advice for developing workplace and professional relationships based on diversity and inclusiveness.
Developing professional relationships
Professional relationships are the building blocks of communication in the workplace regardless of diversity; without them, it is impossible to complete anything well and on time. To improve your organisation’s productivity, you may need to develop your professional relationships with other people and help others to do the same.
Important characteristics of workplace relationships are:
⮚ Trust: You should develop this by being honest and dependable in all your interactions with that person; if you say you will do something, make sure you follow through. Never lie to them or talk about them behind their back
⮚ Mutual respect: You should show you value their contribution, input and ideas (e.g. “Thanks, that was a great suggestion!”) Acknowledge when they know more about a subject and ask politely for their support or advice
⮚ Mindfulness: Consider the impact of everything you say and do beforehand to prevent anything that might be offensive or harmful to the
relationship. To do this, think about how they may feel and don’t let your own negative emotions (e.g. anger, frustration) affect how you communicate with them
⮚ Effective communication: Be open and clear in communication, whether it is face-to- face, by email or phone. Always try to explain your needs and what you would like from other people. If you have difficulties with communication, try planning it out beforehand.
You should aim to not just tolerate diversity but welcome it, as people from different backgrounds can offer different perspectives. If someone makes a suggestion that is different to how you would normally do something, don’t dismiss it by saying: “No, that’s not how we do things around here.” Consider the idea for its merits and adapt it to your workplace if necessary.
Also, don’t fall into the trap of assuming that other people are less knowledgeable or skills in a subject because they are different from you.
To coach others to develop better professional relationships, you could:
⮚ Encourage employees to spend more time with each other
⮚ Talk about their experience and areas of expertise
⮚ Practice maintaining relationships after a disagreement
⮚ Develop their active-listening and teamwork skills
⮚ Encourage them to give and receive appropriate feedback
⮚ Resolve conflict quickly and efficiently.
Sources: https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/good-relationships.htm, http://www.salesprogress.com/coaching-leadership/bid/103972/Coach-Employees-to-Build- Relationships-in-the-Workplace (Accessed 03.06.19)
Activity 2B
2.3 – Use work practices that make environments safe for all
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Explain why it is important to use work practices which make environments safe for all
⮚ Define cultural safety and give examples of how this can be ensured in the workplace.
Safe work practices
During your working practice, it is important that you adopt practices which make environments safe for everyone around you. Safe working practices are essential to ensuring that people feel included, valued and respected.
Your own workplace may or may not be a culturally safe place. Therefore, you will need to evaluate the extent to which it implements culturally safe practices. Is the workforce educated on different cultures, and are there policies and procedures in place to prevent discrimination?
You should take the opportunity to find out all of the different cultures involved in your work and workplace.
Work practices that you should ensure are suitable may include:
⮚ Dealing with persons of diverse race, ethnicity, class, ability, sexual preference and age
⮚ Compliance with duty of care policies of the organisation
⮚ Collection and provision of information
⮚ Communication
⮚ Provision of assistance
⮚ Contact with families and carers
⮚ Physical contact
⮚ Care of deceased persons
⮚ Handling personal belongings
⮚ Provision of food services.
If your organisation’s current work practices can’t ensure that all people involved feel safe, you will need to change them. This may require speaking with your manager or members of HR.
Cultural safety
“Cultural safety” is a term which describes the empowerment of all people, regardless of diversity. It moves beyond cultural sensitivity to analyse power imbalances, institutional discrimination, colonisation and relationships with colonisers. Culturally unsafe practices are those which diminish, demean or disempower the cultural identity and well-being of an individual.
A definitive definition of cultural safety does not exist – there is debate on how it differs from cultural awareness, cultural sensitivity, cultural appropriateness and cultural competency.
An effective evaluation tool is to see if your work and workplace comply with the four principles of cultural safety.
The principles are:
⮚ Principle 1: Improve the health and wellbeing of others. This involves emphasising positive health outcomes and acknowledging the different beliefs of others who are different from them
⮚ Principle 2: The aim of cultural safety is to identify the power relationship of the stakeholders in a service and empower the users of a service. They should feel confident to express any issues or worries they have. Providers should also educate themselves about cultural diversity in their environment and apply social science concepts to help them respond effectively to their clientele
⮚ Principle 3: Recognising inequalities in the following areas:
o health care
o employment
o education
o society
o societal interactions
o employment
You must also learn to accept diversity in behaviour and social structure, and minimise things that act as barriers to cultural safety
⮚ Principle 4: Providers must examine their practices carefully, in order to avoid bias towards certain cultures, and to prevent their own culture, attitudes and experiences influencing their decisions.
Power relationships should be balanced, so everyone is receiving equal treatment and tension or alienation does not arise between cultures.
You must also understand your own rights, as well as those of others, and respect them accordingly, so you realise that differences are legitimate, and not something to be the basis of discrimination.
Activity 2C
Summative Assessments
At the end of your Learner Workbook, you will find the Summative Assessments. This includes:
⮚ Skills assessment
⮚ Knowledge assessment
⮚ Performance assessment.
This holistically assesses your understanding and application of the skills, knowledge and performance requirements for this unit. Once this is completed, you will have finished this unit and be ready to move onto the next one – well done!
Appendices
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Preamble
Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world,
Whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind, and the advent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech and belief and freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed as the highest aspiration of the common people,
Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression, that human rights should be protected by the rule of law,
Whereas it is essential to promote the development of friendly relations between nations,
Whereas the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women and have determined to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom,
Whereas Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in cooperation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Whereas a common understanding of these rights and freedoms is of the greatest importance for the full realization of this pledge,
Now, therefore,
The General Assembly,
Proclaims this Universal Declaration of Human Rights as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, to the end that every individual and every organ of society, keeping this Declaration constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education to promote respect for these rights and freedoms and by progressive measures, national and international, to secure their universal and effective recognition and observance, both among the peoples of Member States themselves and among the peoples of territories under their jurisdiction.
Article I
All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.
Article 2
Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status. Furthermore, no distinction shall be made on the basis of the political, jurisdictional or international status of the country or territory to which a person belongs, whether it be independent, trust, non-self-governing or under any other limitation of sovereignty.
Article 3
Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person.
Article 4
No one shall be held in slavery or servitude; slavery and the slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms.
Article 5
No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Article 6
Everyone has the right to recognition everywhere as a person before the law.
Article 7
All are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to equal protection of the law. All are entitled to equal protection against any discrimination in violation of this Declaration and against any incitement to such discrimination.
Article 8
Everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the competent national tribunals for acts violating the fundamental rights granted him by the constitution or by law.
Article 9
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest, detention or exile.
Article 10
Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal, in the determination of his rights and obligations and of any criminal charge against him.
Article 11
1. Everyone charged with a penal offence has the right to be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law in a public trial at which he has had all the guarantees necessary for his defence.
2. No one shall be held guilty of any penal offence on account of any act or omission which did not constitute a penal offence, under national or international law, at the time when it was committed. Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the one that was applicable at the time the penal offence was committed.
Article 12
No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks upon his honour and reputation. Everyone has the right to the protection of the law against such interference or attacks.
Article 13
1. Everyone has the right to freedom of movement and residence within the borders of each State.
2. Everyone has the right to leave any country, including his own, and to return to his country.
Article 14
1. Everyone has the right to seek and to enjoy in other countries asylum from persecution.
2. This right may not be invoked in the case of prosecutions genuinely arising from non- political crimes or from acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Article 15
1. Everyone has the right to a nationality.
2. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his nationality nor denied the right to change his nationality.
Article 16
1. Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry and to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.
2. Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses.
3. The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the State.
Article 17
1. Everyone has the right to own property alone as well as in association with others.
2. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his property.
Article 18
Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief, and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in teaching, practice, worship and observance.
Article 19
Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers.
Article 20
1. Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and association.
2. No one may be compelled to belong to an association.
Article 21
1. Everyone has the right to take part in the government of his country, directly or through freely chosen representatives.
2. Everyone has the right to equal access to public service in his country.
3. The will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government; this will shall be expressed in periodic and genuine elections which shall be by universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures.
Article 22
Everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social security and is entitled to realization, through national effort and international co-operation and in accordance with the organization and resources of each State, of the economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity and the free development of his personality.
Article 23
1. Everyone has the right to work, to free choice of employment, to just and favourable conditions of work and to protection against unemployment.
2. Everyone, without any discrimination, has the right to equal pay for equal work.
3. Everyone who works has the right to just and favourable remuneration ensuring for himself and his family an existence worthy of human dignity, and supplemented, if necessary, by other means of social protection.
4. Everyone has the right to form and to join trade unions for the protection of his interests.
Article 24
Everyone has the right to rest and leisure, including reasonable limitation of working hours and periodic holidays with pay.
Article 25
1. Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services, and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.
2. Motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care and assistance. All children, whether born in or out of wedlock, shall enjoy the same social protection.
Article 26
1. Everyone has the right to education. Education shall be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental stages. Elementary education shall be compulsory. Technical and professional education shall be made generally available, and higher education shall be equally accessible to all on the basis of merit.
2. Education shall be directed to the full development of the human personality and to the strengthening of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. It shall promote understanding, tolerance and friendship among all nations, racial or religious groups, and shall further the activities of the United Nations for the maintenance of peace.
3. Parents have a prior right to choose the kind of education that shall be given to their children.
Article 27
1. Everyone has the right freely to participate in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy the arts and to share in scientific advancement and its benefits.
2. Everyone has the right to the protection of the moral and material interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the author.
Article 28
Everyone is entitled to a social and international order in which the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration can be fully realized.
Article 29
1. Everyone has duties to the community in which alone the free and full development of his personality is possible.
2. In the exercise of his rights and freedoms, everyone shall be subject only to such limitations as are determined by law solely for the purpose of securing due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others and of meeting the just requirements of morality, public order and the general welfare in a democratic society.
3. These rights and freedoms may, in no case, be exercised contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Article 30
Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as implying for any State, group or person any right to engage in any activity or to perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights and freedoms set forth herein.
Source: http://www.ohchr.org/EN/UDHR/Documents/UDHR_Translations/eng.pdf (Accessed 03.06.19)
1. What are some of the benefits of diversity in the workplace? Give ten examples.
*
2. How can you respect diversity in all areas of work? Give four examples
*
3. Give three examples of inclusive principles.
*
4. Create a 5-10 minute training presentation for workers that gives practical advice for developing workplace and professional relationships based on appreciation of diversity and inclusiveness.
*
5. Why is it important to use work practices that make environments safe for all? Explain in no more than 50 words.
*
6. Identify and briefly describe one safe work practice that is relevant to your role. Give one method of implementing it into your daily routine.
*
7. Define cultural safety and how you ensure it in the workplace. Give three examples

