This unit applies to all workers.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
3. Communicate with people from diverse backgrounds and situations
3.1 Show respect for diversity in communication with all people
3.2 Use verbal and non-verbal communication constructively to establish, develop and maintain effective relationships, mutual trust and confidence
3.3 Where a language barrier exists, use effective strategies to communicate in the most efficient way possible
3.4 Seek assistance from interpreters or other persons according to communication needs
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Undertaken a structured process to reflect on own perspectives on diversity
⮚ Recognised and respected the needs of people from diverse social and cultural backgrounds in at least 3 different situations:
o selected and used appropriate verbal and non-verbal communication
o recognised situations where misunderstandings may arise from diversity and formed appropriate responses.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Concepts of cultural awareness, cultural safety and cultural competence and how these impact different work roles
⮚ Concepts and definitions of diversity
⮚ Own culture and the community attitudes, language, policies and structures of that culture and how they impact on different people and groups
⮚ Features of diversity in Australia and how this impacts different areas of work and life:
o political
o social
o economic
o cultural
⮚ Legal and ethical considerations (international, national, state/territory, local) for working with diversity, how these impact individual workers, and the consequences of breaches:
o discrimination:
▪  age
▪  disability
▪  racial
▪  sex
o human rights:
▪  Universal declaration of human rights
▪  relationship between human needs and human rights
▪  frameworks, approaches and instruments used in the workplace
o rights and responsibilities of workers, employers and clients, including appropriate action when rights are being infringed or responsibilities not being carried out
⮚ Key areas of diversity and their characteristics, including:
o culture, race, ethnicity
o disability
o religious or spiritual beliefs
o gender, including transgender
o intersex
o generational
o sexual orientation/sexual identity - lesbian, gay, bisexual, heterosexual
⮚ Key aspects, and the diversity, of Australia’s Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander cultures, including:
o social, political and economic issues affecting Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people
o own culture, western systems and structures and how these impact on Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people and their engagement with services
⮚ Potential needs of marginalised groups, including:
o protective factors
o physical, mental and emotional health issues/care needs
o consideration of impacts of discrimination, trauma, exclusion and negative attitudes
⮚ Resources that support individuals and organisations to embrace and respond to diversity
o language and cultural interpreters
o imagery
⮚ Influences and changing practices in Australia and their impact on the diverse communities that make up Australian society
⮚ Impact of diversity practices and experiences on personal behaviour, interpersonal relationships, perception and social expectations of others.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. Where simulation is used, it must reflect real working conditions by modelling industry operating conditions and contingencies, as well as, using suitable facilities, equipment and resources.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
3. Communicate with people from diverse backgrounds and situations
3.1.  Show respect for diversity in communication with all people
3.2.  Use verbal and non-verbal communication constructively to establish, develop and maintain effective relationships, mutual trust and confidence
3.3.  Where a language barrier exists, use effective strategies to communicate in the most efficient way possible
3.4.  Seek assistance from interpreters or other persons according to communication needs
3.1 – Show respect for diversity in communication with all people
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify different ways to show respect for diversity in communication.
Demonstrating respect
It is important to demonstrate respect whenever you communicate with people. This could be the difference between somebody coming away feeling satisfied with the communication and them feeling as though you didn’t value their communication at all. This applies for all forms of communication.
Communication may include:
⮚ Verbal
⮚ Appropriate gestures and facial and physical expressions
⮚ Posture
⮚ Written
⮚ Signage
⮚ Through an interpreter or other person.
It is important to constantly communicate with the people involved about their needs. This demonstrates caring for their thoughts and preferences, which can make people less afraid to speak up about their needs. For example, when speaking with someone whose first language isn’t English, you might ask: “Are you comfortable reading written material, or would prefer me to read it to you?”
Methods of demonstrating respect include:
⮚ Spellings/pronunciation: Not spelling or pronouncing someone’s name right is often interpreted as a sign that you don’t value them, and it is more likely to happen with people from other cultures. Don’t be afraid to clarify how to say/write their name
⮚ Acquiring necessary aids: As mentioned in other chapters, you may require language, sign language or cultural interpreters; if so ensure that you enter communications prepared
⮚ Using generic language: Don’t automatically assume someone is heterosexual; generic language like “your partner” rather than “your husband/wife” may avoid awkwardness and prevent people from being excluded
⮚ Learning cultural standards: We are all familiar with how people in our own culture communicate, including volume, personal space, language, and so on. However, it may vary in other cultures; if you interact with people regularly, take time to learn the accepted standards and differences.
Activity 3A
3.2 – Use verbal and non-verbal communication constructively to establish, develop and maintain effective relationships, mutual trust and confidence
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Describe non-verbal communication techniques which can be used to maintain relationships
⮚ Take part in a role-play activity, demonstrating the ability to engage in respectful discussion using verbal and non-verbal techniques.
Communicating effectively
There are a number of general factors that can influence the effectiveness of communication for both parties. You should ensure you use these to develop effective relationships.
Some of these can include:
⮚ Resistance, due to lack of trust
⮚ Interruptions
⮚ The environment
⮚ Preconceptions
⮚ Attitude differences
⮚ Stress
⮚ Illness or pain
⮚ Lack of common ground
⮚ Lack of empathy for the other person
⮚ Cultural, religious and social differences
⮚ Non-verbal communication mishaps.
It is important to be empathic when responding to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people; this is different to being sympathetic. It is essentially the ability to put yourself in your client's shoes.
Verbal responses shouldn’t assume or be judgmental, should convey care and empathy, and should be culturally sensitive.
Visual/iconic strategies – diagrams, tables, graphs, pictures
Visual strategies can reinforce meaning and make it easier for people to relate the words you are speaking to actual meaning. These are good to use when discussing figures or detailed information, as it translates them into a meaningful representation.
Flow charts, video images
These can be easier to follow and more engaging for some people than simple verbal communication. They can be used in addition to verbal communication, or as an introduction to a topic you are going to discuss. As no immediate response is required, it gives them more time to process and contemplate the information.
Use of computer technology and other media
In the modern world, computer technology and related media is being increasingly used to facilitate communication.
It allows the utilisation of various communication mediums, such as:
⮚ Email
⮚ Video conferencing
⮚ Projection monitors
⮚ PowerPoint presentations
⮚ Mobile phones
⮚ Instant/text messaging
⮚ Social networking
⮚ Laptops/tablets
⮚ Internet.
These communication methods make it easier to communicate in a multitude of situations and locations, across distances and without the need to necessarily be face-to-face.
You will need to ensure you use appropriate language and the correct terms to describe things, as well as understanding that some words do not carry the same meaning in yours and their language. Try and use their preferred terms, where possible.
You may also need to adjust your non-verbal communication in subtle ways to meet cultural expectations and personal preferences.
For example, you should avoid the following non-verbal cures when communicating with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people:
⮚ Persistent questioning
⮚ Direct questioning
⮚ Loud voices
⮚ Lengthy eye contact
⮚ Invading their personal space
⮚ Following routines rigidly
⮚ Ignoring visitors
⮚ Talking while writing
⮚ Anything that may be associated with past negative experiences for them.
Strategies for individuals
The RESPECT strategy
The RESPECT strategy is an acronym from Cornerstone Coaching and Training that teaches seven ways to show respect verbally and non-verbally.
These are:
⮚ Recognise how what you’re saying is coming across
⮚ Eliminate negative words and phrases from your vocabulary. Don’t use words that can be hurtful, offensive or misinterpreted
⮚ Speak with people, not at them. Engage in a conversation, not a debate or lecture
⮚ Practice appreciation. Show appreciation to those around you
⮚ Earn respect from others by modelling respectful behaviours yourself
⮚ Consider others’ feelings before speaking and acting
⮚ Take time to listen. Don’t interrupt.
Modified from: ‘Communicating respect |Test your skills’, Cornerstone Coaching and Training, http://www.cornerstone-ct.com/communicating-respect/ (Accessed 03.06.19)
Non-verbal strategies
Gestures and non-verbal techniques:
⮚ You should smile and nod to them as a welcome
⮚ Do not touch someone without their permission
⮚ Do not invade their personal space
⮚ Use Aboriginal visual and written material, where appropriate and possible.
Display of positive regard and respect:
⮚ Actively listen and respond to their needs
⮚ Respect all people and involve them in important decision-making situations
⮚ Respect people’s cultural values, protocols and methods of doing business
⮚ Provide refreshments and meet transport needs if holding a meeting with them
⮚ Wait your turn to speak
⮚ Use appropriate language.
Non-judgemental approaches:
⮚ Don't assume they are wrong because they are different
⮚ Don't make assumptions about their beliefs and practices without asking.
Ongoing personal/interpersonal skill development
You will need to continually develop the skills you use for communication and at work, so that you can meet the communication needs of people from different cultures. This may require extra training and introspective evaluation on your part.
Monitoring and reflecting on own actions
Think before you act; what is normal in your culture may be offensive to someone else. You may also be imposing your culture on someone else by assuming that everyone thinks the same as you. The best way
to see if you are being culturally imposing is to learn about the cultures of others and these daily practices. If something you ask other people to do contradicts their cultural beliefs, you are imposing on them.
Activity 3B
3.3 – Where a language barrier exists, use effective strategies to communicate in the most efficient way possible
3.4 – Seek assistance from interpreters or other persons according to communication needs
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Provide an overview of how to overcome language and cultural barriers
⮚ List options for using resources to communicate effectively when there is a language barrier
⮚ Research and identify different interpreters or other persons to assist interpreting for a range of given people with communication needs.
Overcoming language barriers
With increasing diversity in Australian society, it is more common to come across people who you don’t share a language with or who aren’t fluent in your language, often referred to as CALD (culturally and linguistically diverse) communities.
Overcoming language barriers can be difficult, but there are a range of things that you can do personally to achieve better cross-cultural communication.
Checklists for better cross-cultural communication
The following checklists have been taken from Working Cross Culturally: A Guide, Multicultural Communities Council of SA Inc. and Multicultural Aged Care Inc. (September 2005).
Good cross-cultural communication practice:
⮚ Learn and use keywords in the person’s own language
⮚ Use visual aids, gestures and physical prompts
⮚ Use only qualified language interpreters
⮚ Provide all information relating to key service delivery contexts (e.g. care plan and service agreement) in the person’s own language
⮚ Accept that it may be necessary to use alternative forms of communication
⮚ Understand that limited proficiency in English does not reflect an individual’s level of intelligence or ability to communicate/read/write fluently in their own language.
Communication checklist:
⮚ Make the environment conducive to communication – avoid places with too much background noise, distractions or likely interruptions
⮚ Speak clearly, but do not raise your voice
⮚ Speak slowly, repeat if necessary, and check the person’s understanding
⮚ Adapt the pace of conversation to suit the person’s needs
⮚ Use words your listener is likely to know and avoid jargon and slang
⮚ Do not speak ‘pidgin English’ – this can actually make it harder for the person to understand you
⮚ Avoid jokes, irony, satire and sarcasm, as these may be lost in translation and misunderstood
⮚ Use the active rather than the passive voice
⮚ Give instructions in clear, logical sentences and present one topic at a time
⮚ Gauge how much people are likely to remember
⮚ Give the speaker plenty of time to respond at their own pace
⮚ Listen
⮚ Give clues through your body language
⮚ Do not exclude the person from discussion because others with better English are present
⮚ Be considerate of the person as an individual.
Both of the above checklists have been modified from source: http://www.ecald.com/Portals/49/Docs/Publications/Working%20Cross%20Culturally.pdf (Accessed 03.06.19)
Using interpreters
In some situations, it may be necessary to employ the use of specialist interpreters.
You will need to know the available interpreter resources available to your organisation and its needs, so you can employ them as necessary.
Government agencies are required to provide and pay for professional interpreters when people are seeking government-related services that have difficulties speaking English.
Useful resources for finding interpreters include:
⮚ Australian Institute of Interpreters and Translators Incorporated (AUSIT):
www.ausit.org
⮚ Translating and Interpreting Service (TIS): www.tisnational.gov.au
⮚ National Accreditation Authority for Translators and Interpreters (NAATI):
www.naati.com.au.
The Translating and Interpreting Service (TIS) National provides free interpretation services to non- English speaking Australian citizens or permanent residents who need to communicate with approved groups and individuals, such as medical professionals.
Interpreters can be accredited and unaccredited – you should aim to provide a 'Professional Interpreter' level worker accredited by the National Accreditation Authority for Translators and Interpreters (NAATI). If this is not possible/available, a 'Paraprofessional Interpreter' should be your second choice.
When you are interacting with cultures that you aren’t familiar with, cultural interpreters can also help to bridge the gap. This may include advising you what is considered polite or inappropriate when you communicate with people from other cultures. This is often used when working with Aboriginal Australian communities.
Imagery
Imagery is important and can affect how people view themselves. While diversity for the sake of diversity isn’t necessary, you should try to be inclusive whenever possible.
For example, imagine you work for an ethnically diverse company, and your organisation brochure has a group of white male employees on. What message does this send to people who may consider applying? It would likely hint to women and non-white people that they wouldn’t be welcome there. Existing employees who aren’t represented on it may also feel less appreciated.
Resources to support visual and iconic strategies
The resources you use to support visual and iconic will depend on the technology and funding you have available to you.
Examples of resources include:
⮚ Laptops
⮚ Tablet computers
⮚ Augmentative and alternative communication aids
⮚ Projectors/monitors
⮚ Mobile phones
⮚ Internet
⮚ Brochures
⮚ Leaflets
⮚ Posters
⮚ Resource cards.
You may have some of these or all of them available for you to use in the workplace – you will need to determine which are best used in certain situations or for certain people.
Cultural brokers
A cultural broker is someone who facilitates people from one culture crossing over to another. In other words, they act as a mediator between people/groups of different cultures, to enable effective communication and reduce conflict. They act as more than just an interpreter – in colloquial terms, they would be known as a "middle man".
Interpreters may be:
➢ Registered – these are professional people whose work involves travelling and mediating for multiple people/groups
⮚ Other multilingual people not related to the person – these may be people on your staff who have multilingual abilities, but this is not their main duty at work.
Email: admin@blocklearning.com.au
Phone: 02 8526 4555
Activity 3C
Summative Assessments
At the end of your Learner Workbook, you will find the Summative Assessments. This includes:
⮚ Skills assessment
⮚ Knowledge assessment
⮚ Performance assessment.
This holistically assesses your understanding and application of the skills, knowledge and performance requirements for this unit. Once this is completed, you will have finished this unit and be ready to move onto the next one – well done!
Appendices
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Preamble
Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world,
Whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind, and the advent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech and belief and freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed as the highest aspiration of the common people,
Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression, that human rights should be protected by the rule of law,
Whereas it is essential to promote the development of friendly relations between nations,
Whereas the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women and have determined to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom,
Whereas Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in cooperation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Whereas a common understanding of these rights and freedoms is of the greatest importance for the full realization of this pledge,
Now, therefore,
The General Assembly,
Proclaims this Universal Declaration of Human Rights as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, to the end that every individual and every organ of society, keeping this Declaration constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education to promote respect for these rights and freedoms and by progressive measures, national and international, to secure their universal and effective recognition and observance, both among the peoples of Member States themselves and among the peoples of territories under their jurisdiction.

These suggested references are for further reading and do not necessarily represent the contents of this unit.

1. How can you show respect for diversity in communication? Identify two different ways.
*
2. How can you overcome language and cultural barriers? Give a general overview of options in no more than 150 words.
*
3. You need to present an idea to your team. Two of your team members have English as a second language. How can you use resources to communicate more efficiently? List at least two options.