No equivalent unit.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
4. Promote understanding across diverse groups
4.1 Identify issues that may cause communication misunderstandings or other difficulties
4.2 Where difficulties or misunderstandings occur, consider the impact of social and cultural diversity
4.3 Make an effort to sensitively resolve differences, taking account of diversity considerations
4.4 Address any difficulties with appropriate people and seek assistance when required
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Undertaken a structured process to reflect on own perspectives on diversity
⮚ Recognised and respected the needs of people from diverse social and cultural backgrounds in at least 3 different situations:
o selected and used appropriate verbal and non-verbal communication
o recognised situations where misunderstandings may arise from diversity and formed appropriate responses.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Concepts of cultural awareness, cultural safety and cultural competence and how these impact different work roles
⮚ Concepts and definitions of diversity
⮚ Own culture and the community attitudes, language, policies and structures of that culture and how they impact on different people and groups
⮚ Features of diversity in Australia and how this impacts different areas of work and life:
o political
o social
o economic
o cultural
⮚ Legal and ethical considerations (international, national, state/territory, local) for working with diversity, how these impact individual workers, and the consequences of breaches:
o discrimination:
▪  age
▪  disability
▪  racial
▪  sex
o human rights:
▪  Universal declaration of human rights
▪  relationship between human needs and human rights
▪  frameworks, approaches and instruments used in the workplace
o rights and responsibilities of workers, employers and clients, including appropriate action when rights are being infringed or responsibilities not being carried out
⮚ Key areas of diversity and their characteristics, including:
o culture, race, ethnicity
o disability
o religious or spiritual beliefs
o gender, including transgender
o intersex
o generational
o sexual orientation/sexual identity - lesbian, gay, bisexual, heterosexual
⮚ Key aspects, and the diversity, of Australia’s Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander cultures, including:
o social, political and economic issues affecting Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people
o own culture, western systems and structures and how these impact on Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people and their engagement with services
⮚ Potential needs of marginalised groups, including:
o protective factors
o physical, mental and emotional health issues/care needs
o consideration of impacts of discrimination, trauma, exclusion and negative attitudes
⮚ Resources that support individuals and organisations to embrace and respond to diversity
o language and cultural interpreters
o imagery
⮚ Influences and changing practices in Australia and their impact on the diverse communities that make up Australian society
⮚ Impact of diversity practices and experiences on personal behaviour, interpersonal relationships, perception and social expectations of others.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. Where simulation is used, it must reflect real working conditions by modelling industry operating conditions and contingencies, as well as, using suitable facilities, equipment and resources.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
4. Promote understanding across diverse groups
4.1.  Identify issues that may cause communication misunderstandings or other difficulties
4.2.  Where difficulties or misunderstandings occur, consider the impact of social and cultural diversity
4.3.  Make an effort to sensitively resolve differences, taking account of diversity considerations
4.4.  Address any difficulties with appropriate people and seek assistance when required
4.1 – Identify issues that may cause communication misunderstandings or other difficulties
4.2 – Where difficulties or misunderstandings occur, consider the impact of social and cultural diversity
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify issues that may cause communication difficulties and explain how to overcome them
⮚ Write a summary in a range of given scenarios, considering how social and cultural diversity may have played a role in the occurrence of misunderstanding.
Communication difficulties
Due to people’s diverse backgrounds, you may encounter communication problems or misunderstandings. It is more productive to identify these issues quickly and resolve them before they become a significant problem.
For example, it is common in most Western workplaces to have an open door policy, where employees can speak to their manager at any time with concerns or problems. However, many other cultures don’t have the same. Instead, they may view the manager’s willingness to communicate as a sign of weakness.
A solution in this instance may be to come to a compromise. Rather than forcing foreign workers to adapt to ways that don’t suit them, the manager could appoint an intermediary to report to them in a more formal manner.
Source: http://hbswk.hbs.edu/archive/3266.html (Accessed 03.06.19)
Issues that may cause difficulties include:
⮚ Jargon and slang
⮚ Unclear organisation rules and protocols
⮚ Written information
⮚ Expected behaviour, such as:
o eye contact
o use of language
o concepts of politeness
⮚ Emotional constraints, such as how extroverted or introverted they are.
Try to anticipate any issues that will cause communication problems or misunderstandings. You may be able to help minimise them in advance. This could include changing your own behaviour (e.g. minimising jargon and slang) or providing information to the person.
Source: http://www.colorado.edu/conflict/peace/problem/cultrbar.htm (Accessed 03.06.19)
Impact of social and cultural diversity
When dealing with communication issues, you should always consider how social and cultural diversity may affect the situation. People who are in a cultural, racial, sexual or religious minority are more vulnerable to a range of issues that may affect their communication.
Consider whether the person:
⮚ Has different experiences from others that you communicate with
⮚ Has different expectations of what communication should be
⮚ Has experienced adversity that makes it more difficult for them to communicate openly. Adversity may include:
o discrimination
o racism, sexism or homophobia
o bullying, either in the workplace or elsewhere
o physical or mental health problems
o unemployment
o homelessness.
In response to this, you should look for compromises that you can achieve, such as the one mentioned above with regards to open-door policies. Try not to use a mind frame of ‘right’ and ‘wrong’ ways of things. Instead, look for ways to reach the desired outcome. Imagine that the person you are communicating with comes from a culture where it is encouraged to talk loudly and expressively, but this is discouraged in your workplace as it disturbs others. You could try to find a separate private meeting place where they can talk in whatever way they wish.
Influences on Australian society that may affect people’s response to diversity may include:
⮚ Religion
⮚ Media
⮚ Recent news, such as immigration or terrorist events
⮚ People’s individual upbringing and communities
⮚ Changing attitudes (usually becoming more tolerant).
Protective factors
These are factors which will decrease the likelihood of them being exposed to certain risks. You may need to look for ways to utilise or encourage the strengths during communication.
The following are protective factors that can reduce the risk of threats often faced by marginalised groups:
⮚ Education
⮚ Employment
⮚ Supportive family and community
⮚ Understanding the language
⮚ Access to legal aid and law enforcement if necessary
⮚ Awareness of the dangers of alcohol and drug abuse
⮚ Ability to practice their culture openly
⮚ Writing and reading skills.
Activity 4A
4.3 – Make an effort to sensitively resolve differences, taking account of diversity considerations
4.4 – Address any difficulties with appropriate people and seek assistance when required
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Provide ideas as to how to sensitively resolve diverse communication difficulties
⮚ Identify two different people or places from which to seek assistance to address any difficulties.
Resolving difficulties, differences or misunderstandings
Ideally, the workplace would be free from difficulties, differences and misunderstandings. In reality, though, these things are inevitable due to circumstances beyond your control. People are individuals and, regardless of cultural backgrounds, will have disagreements over matters of opinion or misunderstandings.
Strategies to resolve difficulties may include:
⮚ Negotiation of culturally appropriate guidelines
⮚ Identification of appropriate mediators
⮚ Negotiating a workplace code of practice.
Negotiation of culturally appropriate guidelines
Having a set of pre-existing culturally appropriate guidelines that all people are required to follow will give you a basis to decide if behaviour has violated these conditions. If these difficulties, differences or misunderstandings are not covered by these, it is your responsibility to amend these for future situations. You must also ensure that these guidelines are communicated to the appropriate person who they affect.
Identification of appropriate mediators
Mediators are essential for resolving disputes; they provide an objective view of the situation and help decide what the resultant actions should be.
You need to identify who will act as a mediator for the dispute in each situation – a set of pre- designated personnel is a useful thing to have. However, make sure that the mediator has no bias towards either party, as it will compromise their ability to be impartial.
Negotiating a workplace code of practice
A code of practice is a set of principles that govern how people are expected to behave in the workplace. It is a written document that is explained to all workers and prevents people claiming ignorance when violating its terms and creating a dispute.
Codes of practice are usually specific to individual organisations, but industry-wide codes of practice also exist. They should be your first point of referral when seeking to resolve a difficulty, difference or misunderstanding. If you negotiate a code of practice with relevant people in your organisation, you can tailor it to work situations and define what is reasonably expected from employees and their behaviour.
Addressing difficulties
If you haven’t managed to resolve differences through any of the methods covered above, you may need to address them with the person directly.
You may need to seek additional assistance, such as:
⮚ Language interpreters
⮚ Cultural interpreters
⮚ The person’s family, friends or carers
⮚ Communication training for the person or other people they interact with
⮚ Diversity awareness programs.
Depending on the context, you may need to involve other people in resolving the communication problem. For example, if they are in a workplace, you may need to talk with managers or co-workers on how they can help to improve communication. Other scenarios may require you to liaise with family members, professionals, service providers or education facilities.
Activity 4B
Summative Assessments
At the end of your Learner Workbook, you will find the Summative Assessments. This includes:
⮚ Skills assessment
⮚ Knowledge assessment
⮚ Performance assessment.
This holistically assesses your understanding and application of the skills, knowledge and performance requirements for this unit. Once this is completed, you will have finished this unit and be ready to move onto the next one – well done!
Appendices
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Preamble
Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world,
Whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind, and the advent of a world in which human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech and belief and freedom from fear and want has been proclaimed as the highest aspiration of the common people,
Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have recourse, as a last resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression, that human rights should be protected by the rule of law,
Whereas it is essential to promote the development of friendly relations between nations,
Whereas the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal rights of men and women and have determined to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom,
Whereas Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in cooperation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Whereas a common understanding of these rights and freedoms is of the greatest importance for the full realization of this pledge,
Now, therefore,
The General Assembly,
Proclaims this Universal Declaration of Human Rights as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations, to the end that every individual and every organ of society, keeping this Declaration constantly in mind, shall strive by teaching and education to promote respect for these rights and freedoms and by progressive measures, national and international, to secure their universal and effective recognition and observance, both among the peoples of Member States themselves and among the peoples of territories under their jurisdiction.

1. Identify three issues that may cause communication difficulties and explain how you can overcome them.
*
2. Write a brief (50-100 word) commentary on each of the following scenarios, considering how social and cultural diversity may have played a role in the misunderstanding occurring. You may conduct research on the cultures of those in the scenarios if you are not sure. Scenario One: There has been a misunderstanding between a worker and a CALD client. The worker made a joke about one of the client’s children, and the client became very upset. The worker doesn’t understand how she has caused offence – it was meant to be funny. Scenario Two: A female worker tried to greet an Orthodox Jewish male client by warmly shaking his hand. He refused to shake her hand, and the worker was offended. Scenario Three: A community worker attends a meeting with an Aboriginal family. It is a very hot day, and she is wearing a short and revealing dress. She notices that the family seem to be irritated and upset with her, even though she is being polite and professional.
*
3. How can you sensitively resolve diverse communication difficulties when you encounter them? In 100-200 words, provide a written summary of your ideas.
*
4. From whom or from where would you seek assistance, if required, to address any difficulties? Identify at least two different answers.