CHCDIV001
Work with diverse people Case Studies
Table of Contents
Table of Contents                                              1
Instructions                                                  2
Case Study A – Safe work practices                                  3
Case Study B – Transcript                                       4
Case Study C – Communication                                    5
Case Study D – Language barrier policies                               6
Case Study E – Miscommunications                                  7
Case Study F – Resolving differences                                 8
Instructions
This document contains all of the case studies available in this unit.
It is to be used when referred to in the Learner Workbook, to help answer the relevant questions.
Case Study A – Safe work practices
Practices for remaining safe in Wellspring Doctor’s Clinic:
⮚ Look out for others’ wellbeing – report it if anything is wrong
⮚ Reading new policies on legislation
⮚ Request help when needed, such as if clients become agitated
⮚ Don’t engage in physical contact with clients
⮚ Don’t attempt to carry heavy objects alone
⮚ Ask for specialist assistance for help with unwell or deceased people.
Case Study B – Transcript
John is collecting information from Allira, an Aboriginal Australian woman so that she can register for a doctor’s clinic.
John: How do you spell your name, Allira?
Allira: It’s A-L-L-I-R-A.
John: Wow, Aboriginal names are so strange! And what’s your address?
Allira: I’m living at 13 George Street with my partner. John: Do you want to register him while you are here? Allira: No, she’s already registered at another clinic.
John: Ok, I just need you to read this information and sign at the bottom to say you agree.
Allira: Actually, my English isn’t very good. Would you be able to tell me what it says?
John: Sorry, I’ve not got time for that now. Try your best and ask me if you’ve got any questions later.
Case Study C – Communication
John is a twenty-year-old who has a speech impediment and is nervous about interacting with strangers, particularly in an official capacity. He worries that people get annoyed with him for taking so long to speak, but hates it when they interrupt.
John needs to attend the doctor’s clinic where you are a receptionist for a sexually transmitted disease. He is also embarrassed about this and thinks that people will judge him.
Case Study D – Language barrier policies
When working here at Wellspring Doctor’s Clinic, you may encounter language barriers.
When this happens, you should:
⮚ Determine what language they are speaking if possible and identify if any employees speak the same language. (A current list is provided below.)
⮚ Speak simply and clearly, but don’t use ‘Pidgin English’ or raise your voice
⮚ Confirm whether the person is understanding
⮚ Use written communication as a communication bridge if possible
⮚ Don’t rush the person, allow them to speak at their own pace.
Case Study E – Miscommunications
You are at a meeting to discuss miscommunications and other difficulties between your workers and clients. Here are some of the topics that are brought up.
There has been a misunderstanding between a worker, Brian, and a CALD client. The worker made a joke about one of the client’s children, and the client became very upset. The worker doesn’t understand how he has caused offence – it was meant to be funny.
A female worker, Madi, tried to greet an Orthodox Jewish male client by warmly shaking his hand. He refused to shake her hand, and the worker was offended.
A community worker, Sarah, attends a meeting with an Aboriginal family. It is a very hot day, and she is wearing a short and revealing dress. She notices that the family seems to be irritated and upset with her, even though she is being polite and professional.
Case Study F – Resolving differences
A Korean man comes into the clinic where you work. He has his son with him and speaks little English. You gather he is angry about a letter he has received, but are unable to work out anything else.
As other clients are beginning to stare, you ask him into a private room where you can resolve the dispute. The boy thanks you in English for holding the door for him.
1. What information about a cultural group may you have to become aware of in order to work effectively with them? Give four areas.
*
2. Give ten types of diversity you may encounter in your role?
*
3. How can your attitudes impact diverse groups of people? (Maximum 100 words)
*
4. How may cultural diversity impact different areas of work? Give four examples.
*
5. What legal methods are there of protecting diverse people from discrimination? (Maximum 100 words)
*
6. Outline the 30 articles of the universal declaration of human rights.
*
7. Briefly describe the difference between human needs and human rights.
*
8. For each area of diversity listed below, describe in detail their characteristics and factors that may affect people in the group: Culture, race, ethnicity, Disability, Religious or spiritual beliefs, Gender Generational, Sexual orientation.
*
9. Give five social, political and economic issues that affect Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
*
10. What could the impact of adversity from being part of a diverse group include? (Maximum 100 words)
*
11. List five resources you may need to work effectively with diverse groups.
*
12. What may affect people’s attitudes to diverse groups? (Maximum 100 words)
*
13. Give an example of a time in your experience when diversity practices have improved an interpersonal relationship.