CHCLEG003
Manage legal and ethical compliance
Chapter 1
Unit of Competency
Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to research information about compliance and ethical practice responsibilities, and then develop and monitor policies and procedures to meet those responsibilities.
This unit applies to people working in roles with managerial responsibility for legal and ethical compliance in small to medium sized organisations. There may or may not be a team of workers involved.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit
Pre-requisite Unit
None stated Unit Sector N/A
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
1. Research information required for legal compliance
1.1 Identify sources of information about compliance requirements
1.2 Evaluate own area of work and determine scope of compliance requirements
1.3 Access and interpret information relevant to area of work
1.4 Identify risks, penalties and consequences of non- compliance
1.5 Assess and act on need for specialist legal advice
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Determined the scope of legal and ethical compliance requirements and responsibilities, and developed policies and procedures for at least 1 workplace or business
⮚ Developed a strategic response to at least 3 different situations where legal or ethical requirements have been breached.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Legal responsibilities and liabilities of managers and others in different types of organisation
⮚ Legal and ethical frameworks (international, national state/territory, local), how these apply in the workplace, and the responsibilities of managers in the development and monitoring of policies and procedures, including those related to:
o children in the workplace
o codes of conduct
o codes of practice
o complaints management
o continuing professional education
o discrimination
o dignity of risk
o duty of care
o human rights:
▪  universal declaration of human rights
▪  relationship between human needs and human rights
▪  frameworks, approaches and instruments used in the workplace
o informed consent
o mandatory reporting
o practice standards
o practitioner/client boundaries
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o policy frameworks
o records management
o rights and responsibilities of workers, employers and clients
o industrial relations legislation and requirements relevant to organisation
o specific requirements in the area of work, including:
▪  key practices that are prohibited by law
▪  auditing and inspection regimes
▪  main consequences of non-compliance
▪  need to apply for licences and associated mandatory training and certification requirements
▪  statutory reporting requirements
▪  business insurances required including public liability and workers compensation
▪  accreditation requirements
▪  requirements to develop and implement plans, policies, codes of conduct or incorporate certain workplace practice
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations of different people
o work health and safety
⮚ Sources of information and advice on compliance including:
o local, state/territory or commonwealth government departments or regulatory agencies
o industry associations
o plain English documentation that explains legislation
⮚ Functions and operating procedures of regulatory authorities of particular relevance to the health and community service sectors
⮚ Methods of receiving updated information on requirements
⮚ Use of policies and procedures in managing compliance and ethical practice in both internal work practice and external service delivery
⮚ Formats for policies and procedures and what they should include
⮚ Techniques for monitoring compliance.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. The following conditions must be met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
o current legislation and regulations
o workplace policies and procedures
⮚ Modelling of industry operating conditions, including:
o use of real or simulated organisation for which the candidate develops policies and procedures
o integration of problem solving activities.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
1. Research information required for legal compliance
1.1.  Identify sources of information about compliance requirements
1.2.  Evaluate own area of work and determine scope of compliance requirements
1.3.  Access and interpret information relevant to area of work
1.4.  Identify risks, penalties and consequences of non compliance
1.5.  Assess and act on need for specialist legal advice
1.1 – Identify sources of information about compliance requirements
1.2 – Evaluate own area of work and determine scope of compliance requirements
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify at least five sources of information on compliance requirements
⮚ Evaluate their own area of work and determine the scope of compliance requirements.
Compliance requirements
It is essential to be aware of the various compliance requirements that apply to your business. The identification of requirements will enable you to develop compliance plans and ensure that you don’t breach any rules or regulations. There are numerous sources of information which relate to specific businesses operating within Australia and abroad. You may consider hiring a compliance specialist and using software to manage information about your responsibilities.
Information on relevant compliance requirements may include:
⮚ Correspondence, emails and other written information provided by internal and external personnel contacted during search activities
⮚ Information downloadable from relevant websites
⮚ Newsletters, bulletins and information sheets
⮚ Periodic documentation distributed by relevant regulatory authorities and standards bodies
⮚ Published information on legislation, regulations, codes of practice, standards, licensing requirements, standard operating procedures, etc.
⮚ Records of conversations and meetings with relevant internal and external personnel.
Evaluating your area of work
The scope of compliance requirements will vary, depending on the nature of your organisation and the specific role that you fulfil. You might have responsibility for overseeing the employment of new staff members, transfer of goods and services, maintenance of policies, and limitation of environmental risk
factors. It will be necessary to research and act in accordance with rules, regulations, and ethical requirements specific to your own area of work.
Your organisation may have policies and procedures relating to:
⮚ Children in the workplace
⮚ Codes of conduct
⮚ Codes of practice
⮚ Complaints management
⮚ Continuing professional education
⮚ Discrimination
⮚ Dignity of risk
⮚ Duty of care
⮚ Human rights:
o universal declaration of human rights
o relationship between human needs and human rights
o frameworks, approaches and instruments used in the workplace
⮚ Informed consent
⮚ Mandatory reporting
⮚ Practice standards
⮚ Practitioner/client boundaries
⮚ Privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
⮚ Policy frameworks
⮚ Records management
⮚ Rights and responsibilities of workers, employers and clients
⮚ Industrial relations legislation and requirements relevant to organisation
⮚ Specific requirements in the area of work, including:
o key practices that are prohibited by law
o auditing and inspection regimes
o main consequences of non-compliance
o need to apply for licences and associated mandatory training and certification requirements
o statutory reporting requirements
o business insurances required including public liability and workers compensation
o accreditation requirements
o requirements to develop and implement plans, policies, codes of conduct or incorporate certain workplace practices
⮚ Work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations of different people
⮚ Work health and safety.
Regulatory authorities
Arguably one of the most important sources of information on compliance requirements is regulatory authorities. These are public bodies that take responsibility for governing particular industries. They are created by statute with the primary task of protecting the public.
An example of a regulatory authority in Australia would be the Department of Health, which seeks to improve and maintain the high standards of Australian health care by ‘strengthening evidence-based policy advice’ and ‘improving program management, research, regulation and partnerships with other government agencies, consumers and stakeholders.’
Regulatory authorities:
⮚ Lay out compliance requirements
⮚ Set conditions for and restrictions on work
⮚ Set standards
⮚ Exercise authority
⮚ Make important decisions
⮚ Enforce decisions
⮚ Discipline businesses that fail to comply with requirements.
There are many regulatory authorities in Australia, so it is important to fully research those which apply to your industry.
Activity 1A
1.3 – Access and interpret information relevant to area of work
1.4 – Identify risks, penalties and consequences of non compliance
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Access information on legal and ethical compliance
⮚ Interpret compliance information
⮚ Identify at least three potential consequences of breaching compliance regulations.
Accessing information on legal and ethical compliance
It is quite likely that you will be aware of the various legal and ethical compliance issues that relate to your area of work. However, it is important to keep up to date and ensure that you are adhering to the required standards.
You may obtain information on internal and external compliance requirements from the following sources:
⮚ Internal policies, standard operating procedures, standards, and codes of practice
⮚ Published material relevant to compliance held in either internal or external libraries
⮚ Relevant legislation, regulations, and licensing requirements pertinent to the organisation's operations and sphere of business.
You may also access these sources of information on compliance:
⮚ Stored compliance data
⮚ Continuous improvement and quality assurance information
⮚ Records of business finances and contracts
⮚ Promotional data and customer interactions
⮚ Business performance records
⮚ Policies and procedures.
Interpreting compliance information
The relevance of some compliance information may be quite obvious. You may identify the need to follow specific organisational procedures and act in accordance with laws. However, it may be worth seeking the assistance of other staff members in some instances. They might have the knowledge required to interpret and explain detailed aspects of compliance.
If there is nobody within your organisation that can provide assistance, then you may consider the option of hiring an external legal expert. They should be able to detail the relevance of business legislation and ethical expectations. You may also arrange meetings for the analysis and evaluation of major compliance issues.
Breaches of compliance
A breach will occur whenever your business fails to act in accordance with legislative and organisational compliance requirements. This may happen as a result of failing to identify the relevant business laws and potential consequences of non-compliance.
If instances of non-compliance are identified by regulatory bodies, your business could face serious repercussions.
The risks, penalties, and other consequences include:
⮚ Government fines
⮚ Seizure of business property
⮚ Suspension or redundancy of individuals responsible for non-compliance
⮚ Audits and payments for workers who’ve been adversely affected by instances of non- compliance
⮚ Criminal prosecution of business representatives
⮚ Dissolution of the business.
Activity 1B
1.5 – Assess and act on need for specialist legal advice
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Seek specialist legal advice on compliance
⮚ Identify at least three pieces of Australian legislation relating to compliance.
Seeking specialist legal advice
Businesses are often reluctant to seek legal advice due to concerns about the costs and amount of time required for legal proceedings. However, such advice should be sought if you lack the knowledge and expertise required to deal with compliance issues internally. You’ll discover that there are numerous sources of legal information, including local business consultancies, and citizen’s advice bureaus. You may also consider the option of hiring a lawyer or solicitor.
You may seek advice for:
⮚ Help in the identification of laws and regulations that apply to your business
⮚ Assistance in the identification of relevant business licenses and subsequent application
⮚ Consultancy on the completion of legally binding forms and contracts
⮚ Support during legal disputes with employees and customers
⮚ Advice on the matter of intellectual property
⮚ Specialist assistance.
You’ll find that there are a wide variety of legal firms specialising in particular aspects of the law. It is important to identify a firm with a proven track record of assisting organisations in your market.
Dedicated lawyers may be able to help you identify areas of compliance and resolve disputes that occur as a result of legal breaches.
Australian standards of compliance
You will have to operate in accordance with different organisational principles and legislative standards specific to the territories of Australia. The major requirements are outlined in the ISO 19600 Compliance Program. This highlights the need for compliance based upon the principles of commitment, implementation, monitoring, measuring, and continual improvement. There are additional expectations regarding registration for Australian business numbers, goods and services tax, and tax file numbers.
Essential Australian legislation includes:
⮚ Corporate Law Economic Reform Program Act 2004
⮚ Federal Privacy Act 1988
⮚ Competition and Consumer Act 2010
⮚ Australian Corporations Act 2001.
You are encouraged to contact the Australian Business License Service for further information about laws specific to your organisation.
Activity 1C
Summative Assessments
At the end of your Learner Workbook, you will find the Summative Assessments. This includes:
⮚ Skills assessment
⮚ Knowledge assessment
⮚ Performance assessment.
This holistically assesses your understanding and application of the skills, knowledge and performance requirements for this unit. Once this is completed, you will have finished this unit and be ready to move onto the next one – well done!

1. Identify five sources of information about compliance requirements.
*
2. Identify five work requirements and say how you need to comply with these for legal and/or ethical reasons. These should be relevant to your organisation or area of business.
*
3. For your area of work, access one document/information source. Provide three legal or ethical facts relevant to your work, saying which source you have used (for example, document title and author/organisation, text and website source, or legislative act/regulation and source).(Note: this source must be authoritative, authentic and accurate).
*
4. Identify four risks and the potential consequences and penalties of non-compliance with these, as specific to your business.
*
5. Identify four reasons for seeking specialist legal advice.
*
6. Who would you approach for specialist legal advice specific to your business?
*