Unit of Competency
Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to research information about compliance and ethical practice responsibilities, and then develop and monitor policies and procedures to meet those responsibilities.
This unit applies to people working in roles with managerial responsibility for legal and ethical compliance in small to medium sized organisations. There may or may not be a team of workers involved.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit
Pre-requisite Unit
None stated Unit Sector N/A
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
2. Determine ethical responsibilities
2.1 Identify the ethical framework that applies to the work context
2.2 Incorporate scope of practice considerations as part of ethical practice
2.3 Evaluate responsibilities to workers, clients and the broader community
2.4 Model ethical behaviour in own work
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Determined the scope of legal and ethical compliance requirements and responsibilities, and developed policies and procedures for at least 1 workplace or business
⮚ Developed a strategic response to at least 3 different situations where legal or ethical requirements have been breached.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Legal responsibilities and liabilities of managers and others in different types of organisation
⮚ Legal and ethical frameworks (international, national state/territory, local), how these apply in the workplace, and the responsibilities of managers in the development and monitoring of policies and procedures, including those related to:
o children in the workplace
o codes of conduct
o codes of practice
o complaints management
o continuing professional education
o discrimination
o dignity of risk
o duty of care
o human rights:
▪  universal declaration of human rights
▪  relationship between human needs and human rights
▪  frameworks, approaches and instruments used in the workplace
o informed consent
o mandatory reporting
o practice standards
o practitioner/client boundaries
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o policy frameworks
o records management
o rights and responsibilities of workers, employers and clients
o industrial relations legislation and requirements relevant to organisation
o specific requirements in the area of work, including:
▪  key practices that are prohibited by law
▪  auditing and inspection regimes
▪  main consequences of non-compliance
▪  need to apply for licences and associated mandatory training and certification requirements
▪  statutory reporting requirements
▪  business insurances required including public liability and workers compensation
▪  accreditation requirements
▪  requirements to develop and implement plans, policies, codes of conduct or incorporate certain workplace practice
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations of different people
o work health and safety
⮚ Sources of information and advice on compliance including:
o local, state/territory or commonwealth government departments or regulatory agencies
o industry associations
o plain English documentation that explains legislation
⮚ Functions and operating procedures of regulatory authorities of particular relevance to the health and community service sectors
⮚ Methods of receiving updated information on requirements
⮚ Use of policies and procedures in managing compliance and ethical practice in both internal work practice and external service delivery
⮚ Formats for policies and procedures and what they should include
⮚ Techniques for monitoring compliance.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. The following conditions must be met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
o current legislation and regulations
o workplace policies and procedures
⮚ Modelling of industry operating conditions, including:
o use of real or simulated organisation for which the candidate develops policies and procedures
o integration of problem solving activities.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
2. Determine ethical responsibilities
2.1.  Identify the ethical framework that applies to the work context
2.2.  Incorporate scope of practice considerations as part of ethical practice
2.3.  Evaluate responsibilities to workers, clients and the broader community
2.4.  Model ethical behaviour in own work
2.1 – Identify the ethical framework that applies to the work context
2.2 – Incorporate scope of practice considerations as part of ethical practice
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Act within their organisation’s ethical framework
⮚ Incorporate scope of practice considerations.
Identifying ethical frameworks
Businesses that act ethically do what’s right by their employees and stakeholders. They follow the established legal principles and ensure that individuals are treated with appropriate dignity and respect. Ethical frameworks are used as guidance when making decisions which impact employees and other business associates. Managers and other key staff members take responsibility for acting within the ethical framework and setting positive examples.
International expectations
There are distinct ethical frameworks that apply to different types of businesses. International organisations must account for the laws and ethics that apply in foreign countries. They have to meet different expectations with regards to the ways in which business is conducted. Decisions that may be deemed ethically sound in one country may be frowned upon in another. It is advisable to write distinct codes of conduct in line with the cultural and ethical principles that apply in different countries. You should also consider the sensitive cultural issues in the countries where you are working. There should be regular communication with employees to ensure that they are aware of international standards.
Codes of conduct and ethics should include the following details:
⮚ Ethical principles
⮚ Professional values
⮚ Ethical responsibilities of senior management
⮚ Guidance on accountability within the business
⮚ Appropriate standards of conduct and practice
⮚ Means of establishing and maintaining standards of discipline
⮚ Ways of maintaining relationships with business associates and members of the public
⮚ Specific requirements relating to working hours and practices.
Businesses that adapt sound ethical frameworks may avoid:
⮚ Discrimination
⮚ Corruption
⮚ Unionisation
⮚ Tax avoidance
⮚ Bribery
⮚ Corruption.
Australian ethical standards
You should also be aware of the ethical frameworks that apply to businesses in the different states of Australia. It is important to maintain general principles of respect and integrity when dealing with customers and colleagues. Business managers should implement policies to ensure that everybody is treated fairly and equally. Australian businesses may draw upon the skills of a multicultural workforce. Employees at all levels will expect to have a say in business decisions. You will also be expected to maintain a fair degree of privacy and confidentiality.
Scope of practice considerations
The scope of practice considerations relate to the specific decisions and functions that you have to carry out on an everyday basis. It is absolutely essential that such actions are carried out in accordance with the ethical standards set by your organisation. You may be required to comply with the ethical
standards when employing new staff members and making promotional decisions. You might also have responsibility for supervising and assigning duties in a fair manner. You should follow the principles established in the codes of conduct and ethics.
You must consider the responsibilities for:
⮚ Maintaining principles of justice
⮚ Preventing discrimination
⮚ Acting with integrity despite pressure in the workplace
⮚ Respecting the rights of privacy and confidentiality
⮚ Acting with self-control and discipline
⮚ Following business conventions
⮚ Respecting the right to freedom of speech
⮚ Refusing to engage in slander.
Activity 2A
2.3 Evaluate responsibilities to workers, clients and the broader community
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify their responsibilities to workers
⮚ Identify their responsibilities to clients
⮚ Identify their responsibilities to the broader community.
Evaluating responsibilities to workers
Your organisation has a variety of legal and ethical responsibilities to workers, clients, and the broader community. It is important to respect the rights of these distinctive groups and not focus solely on profitability. The nature of your organisation will have a direct bearing on the types of responsibilities that should be upheld. It may be necessary to oversee the use of heavy industrial machinery and ensure that high standards of health and safety are maintained. You may also have to find ways of minimising the environmental impact of any work that is undertaken.
Responsibilities to workers
Health and safety
Employers have a duty to ensure the health and safety of their workers. They should create clear policies and procedures to highlight the safest ways of carrying out business tasks. Machinery should be maintained and regular inspections undertaken to ensure that employees are acting in accordance with the health and safety standards. Organisations must also abide by legislation regarding the storage of potentially hazardous chemicals and maintenance of safe working environments.
WHS legislation stipulates that employers must provide their staff with:
⮚ Safe premises
⮚ Safe machinery and materials
⮚ Safe systems of work
⮚ Information, instruction, training and supervision
⮚ A suitable working environment and facilities.
Employees are also obliged to ensure that they work safely and do not endanger the safety of their colleagues, clients and others.
How WHS affects your work in health will vary according to your job role and your industry. In order to work safely and legally in your role, you should have been trained to do so by your organisation, as this is a legal requirement.
Where you identify possible or actual WHS breaches in your planned responses, they will need to be reviewed and amended to be compliant immediately before they are used again.
Equal opportunities
Employers should recognise their responsibility to ensure that workers are given equal opportunities for advancement. It is also important to maintain fair rates of pay and recognise the contributions of all employees. The minimum wage rate varies depending upon age and other circumstances. However, employers must be aware of the legislation and make appropriate wage adjustments. It is also important to safeguard employees against discrimination in the workplace. If discrimination does occur, then it should be investigated and dealt with according to the law.
Equal opportunity/discrimination
All people should be valued and treated with respect when it comes to their individual differences. The Equal Opportunity Act 1984 was created to be enforced in all workplaces. It identifies features that may cause prejudices among groups of people.
Discrimination means unfair treatment of a person based on prejudices.
Under the Act, it is illegal for any person or establishment to discriminate against another based on:
⮚ Gender
⮚ Marital status
⮚ Sexual preference
⮚ Race
⮚ Culture/religious beliefs
⮚ Personal principles or beliefs
⮚ Pregnancy
⮚ Age
⮚ Physical or mental impairment.
Responsibilities to clients
It is absolutely essential for businesses to maintain positive relationships with their clients. Companies with high levels of customer engagement appreciate the importance of inviting and responding to feedback. They encourage customers to give their opinions about the development and improvement of products and services. It is only natural for business representatives to be enthusiastic about the features and benefits of their goods and services. However, it is important to provide customers with realistic information. Ethical companies also maintain fair pricing policies and deal with complaints in the appropriate manner. They establish systems for the protection of customer information and only share details with third parties when the customers give their consent.
Rights and responsibilities of clients
All clients have certain statutory rights that must be awarded to them regardless of your personal opinion of them.
Rights may include:
⮚ To be treated in a professional and courteous manner
⮚ To have differences respected, in relation to:
o race
o ethnicity
o gender
o nationality
o sexual orientation
o religion
o age
o disability
o economic situation
o personal values
⮚ Respect for personal privacy and confidentiality
⮚ A right to a safe environment
⮚ A right to choice of services
⮚ Participation in decisions concerning their care
⮚ A right to complain
⮚ A right to view information held about them
⮚ Consultation on any changes to the services they receive.
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
The Competition and Consumer Act 2010 replaced the Trade Practices 1974. It promotes fair trading and competition for businesses, as well as protecting the consumers their products are aimed at.
It covers the following:
⮚ Dealings with suppliers, wholesalers, retailers, customers and competitors
⮚ Industry codes of practices
⮚ Product safety
⮚ Unfair market practices
⮚ Product labelling
⮚ Price
⮚ Industry regulation (e.g. gas, electricity, airports, telecommunications).
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission is in charge of enforcing the Competition and Consumer Act.
Consumer protection law
The Australian Consumer Law (ACL) came into effect on January 1, 2011.
The ACL includes:
⮚ A national unfair contract terms law covering standard form consumer contracts
⮚ A national law guaranteeing consumer rights when buying goods and services
⮚ A national product safety law and enforcement system
⮚ A national law for unsolicited consumer agreements covering door-to-door sales and telephone sales
⮚ Simple national rules for lay-by agreements
⮚ New penalties, enforcement powers and consumer redress options.
It applies in all States and Territories and to all Australian businesses, for all transactions that have occurred since January 1, 2011. The full text is set out in the Competition and Consumer Act 2010, in Schedule 2.
Australian Government Policy Framework for Consumer Protection in Electronic Commerce
Consumer Protection in Electronic Commerce is designed to provide consumer protection for people who make purchases online and online businesses.
The policy requires:
⮚ Accurate and sufficient information is provided about the product
⮚ A secure payment process
⮚ The availability and provision of effective and accessible redress
⮚ Agreement upon relevant areas of jurisdiction
⮚ That customer information is protected and remains private.
Responsibilities to the broader community
There’s a good chance that your business operations will have a direct impact on the surrounding environment and people in the local community. However, you can offset the potentially negative impacts by offering training opportunities, employing local people and supporting community initiatives. Local businesses and residents may also enjoy the benefits of quality services. There is a great emphasis on the environmental sustainability of businesses at present. Ethical companies develop initiatives to limit their environmental impact and encourage employees to take part in local projects. The introduction and maintenance of social projects may have an overwhelmingly positive impact on public perceptions of your business.
Activity 2B
2.4 – Model ethical behaviour in own work
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Model ethical behaviour
⮚ Train employees.
Modelling ethical behaviour
You can set a positive example for other employees to follow by modelling ethical behaviour in your own work. It is particularly important for senior managers and other key business representatives to lead by example. The standards that they set will be picked up by other members of the organisation and have a direct impact on the employee’s work.
Managers with good ethical standards will:
⮚ Take the lead and model ethical behaviour
⮚ Take colleague’s views into account and explain the ethical reasons for business decisions
⮚ Include details of business ethics in different forms of communication
⮚ Encourage discussions about ethical issues
⮚ Ensure that ethical principles are outlined for all employees
⮚ Act upon the sound advice and suggestions made by subordinates.
Acting as a role model
It is important act in accordance with the codes of conduct and ethics. Your organisation may also provide an employee handbook for guidance on how to act in different situations. You should show a respect for your colleagues and customers. Treat everybody fairly and show appreciation for other people’s contributions. Don’t talk behind people’s backs or discriminate for any reason. Accept ultimate responsibility for your own decisions and actions, despite the potentially negative repercussions. Fulfil your duties, as outlined in the job description and maintain compliance with established organisational policies.
You should remember the ethical principle of doing unto to others as you would have them do unto you. Consider the implications of what you say and how you act in the workplace. Respect other people’s rights to privacy and freedom of speech. Take any feedback into account and don’t burden others with duties that they will struggle to perform. Follow through on rewards and punishments for ethical or unethical behaviour in the workplace.
It is essential to show respect for the organisation that you are working for. You should take care when claiming expenses and using resources in the workplace. You should also demonstrate commitment and do your best to maintain positive relationships with customers and other business associates. Adopt ethical selling practices and act appropriately when there are conflicts of interest.
Training employees
There are numerous means of communicating appropriate forms of behaviour in the workplace. Your organisation may arrange training sessions and workshops so that employees can learn about the ethical principles. Example scenarios may be posed, and employees given the opportunity to demonstrate ethical decision-making ability. They should seek assistance whenever there is concern about the ethical implications of decisions.
You may highlight the six-step decision-making model:
⮚ Define the problem – Identify the issue and consider the scope for impact upon your organisation
⮚ Identify alternatives – Consider the various ways of overcoming the problem in accordance with your ethical standards
⮚ Evaluate alternatives – Think about the advantages and disadvantages of resolution methods
⮚ Make the decision – Choose the best means of resolution for your business
⮚ Implement the decision – Take the necessary steps to overcome the problem
⮚ Evaluate the decision – Consider the effectiveness of your chosen process for overcoming the problem.
Activity 2C
Summative Assessments
At the end of your Learner Workbook, you will find the Summative Assessments. This includes:
⮚ Skills assessment
⮚ Knowledge assessment
⮚ Performance assessment.
This holistically assesses your understanding and application of the skills, knowledge and performance requirements for this unit. Once this is completed, you will have finished this unit and be ready to move onto the next one – well done!

1. Write a paragraph about the ethical framework that applies to your business. Include details of international and national considerations.
*
2. Research, evaluate and write three separate paragraphs on the responsibilities of your organisation or business industry to employees, clients and the broader community. Include details of health and safety, equal opportunities, fair selling strategies, and corporate social responsibilities.