Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to research information about compliance and ethical practice responsibilities, and then develop and monitor policies and procedures to meet those responsibilities.
This unit applies to people working in roles with managerial responsibility for legal and ethical compliance in small to medium sized organisations. There may or may not be a team of workers involved.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit
Pre-requisite Unit
None stated Unit Sector N/A
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
3. Develop and communicate policies and procedures
3.1 Clearly articulate and document policies and procedures to support legal and ethical practice in readily accessible formats
3.2 Integrate documentation and record keeping requirements into policies and procedures
3.3 Ensure systems protect client information
3.4 Nominate the roles and responsibilities of different people in meeting requirements where multiple people are involved
3.5 Distribute policies, procedures and legal information to colleagues and peers in a timely fashion
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Determined the scope of legal and ethical compliance requirements and responsibilities, and developed policies and procedures for at least 1 workplace or business
⮚ Developed a strategic response to at least 3 different situations where legal or ethical requirements have been breached.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Legal responsibilities and liabilities of managers and others in different types of organisation
⮚ Legal and ethical frameworks (international, national state/territory, local), how these apply in the workplace, and the responsibilities of managers in the development and monitoring of policies and procedures, including those related to:
o children in the workplace
o codes of conduct
o codes of practice
o complaints management
o continuing professional education
o discrimination
o dignity of risk
o duty of care
o human rights:
▪  universal declaration of human rights
▪  relationship between human needs and human rights
▪  frameworks, approaches and instruments used in the workplace
o informed consent
o mandatory reporting
o practice standards
o practitioner/client boundaries
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o policy frameworks
o records management
o rights and responsibilities of workers, employers and clients
o industrial relations legislation and requirements relevant to organisation
o specific requirements in the area of work, including:
▪  key practices that are prohibited by law
▪  auditing and inspection regimes
▪  main consequences of non-compliance
▪  need to apply for licences and associated mandatory training and certification requirements
▪  statutory reporting requirements
▪  business insurances required including public liability and workers compensation
▪  accreditation requirements
▪  requirements to develop and implement plans, policies, codes of conduct or incorporate certain workplace practice
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations of different people
o work health and safety
⮚ Sources of information and advice on compliance including:
o local, state/territory or commonwealth government departments or regulatory agencies
o industry associations
o plain English documentation that explains legislation
⮚ Functions and operating procedures of regulatory authorities of particular relevance to the health and community service sectors
⮚ Methods of receiving updated information on requirements
⮚ Use of policies and procedures in managing compliance and ethical practice in both internal work practice and external service delivery
⮚ Formats for policies and procedures and what they should include
⮚ Techniques for monitoring compliance.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. The following conditions must be met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
o current legislation and regulations
o workplace policies and procedures
⮚ Modelling of industry operating conditions, including:
o use of real or simulated organisation for which the candidate develops policies and procedures
o integration of problem solving activities.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
3. Develop and communicate policies and procedures
3.1.  Clearly articulate and document policies and procedures to support legal and ethical practice in readily accessible formats
3.2.  Integrate documentation and record keeping requirements into policies and procedures
3.3.  Ensure systems protect client information
3.4.  Nominate the roles and responsibilities of different people in meeting requirements where multiple people are involved
3.5.  Distribute policies, procedures and legal information to colleagues and peers in a timely fashion
3.1 – Clearly articulate and document policies and procedures to support legal and ethical practice in readily accessible formats
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Use a variety of methods to communicate legal and ethical practice in the workplace.
Communicating legal and ethical practice in the workplace
There are numerous ways of communicating legal and ethical practice in the workplace. The codes of conduct and ethics should be written in combination with employee handbooks and policies on behaviour. You may be legally required to produce regular financial accounts and follow specific procedures when hiring staff. It will also be necessary to consider ethical issues such as discrimination and freedom of speech in the workplace.
Your policies and procedures should account for the legal and ethical issues associated with essential business practices. It is important to identify the responsibilities of individual personnel and include descriptions of any technical terms. It is generally advisable to use plain and simple language for the understanding of all employees. Workers will be able to follow and act in accordance with any documentation that is clearly articulated.
You policies and procedures should be written in accordance with the seven c’s:
⮚ Context – Detailing the specific processes and employee responsibilities
⮚ Consistency – Maintaining standards of content and presentation
⮚ Completeness – Ensuring that all relevant details are included
⮚ Control – Establishing methods for measuring the effectiveness of business procedures
⮚ Compliance – Taking account of the relevant laws and regulations
⮚ Correctness – Ensuring that your documentation is factually and grammatically correct
⮚ Clarity – Clearly expressing the terms and procedures for general understanding.
You should also follow these rules on writing clearly:
⮚ Consider the concerns and requirements of people who will be reading your documentation
⮚ Use short and uncomplicated words wherever possible
⮚ Keep your sentences short and focussed
⮚ Use the active voice (particularly when writing procedures)
⮚ Use bullet points and italics to emphasise important sections of text
⮚ Break up the text with visuals to clarify meaning
⮚ Reread your documentation and ensure that it has a clear purpose.
Formatting your policies and procedures
It is important to choose relevant titles for your policies and procedures. Specific codes may be used for documentation which applies to certain types of legislation and business ethics. You may also use a file management system to ensure that your employees can gain rapid access. Your documentation should be clearly structured so that employees can identify the relevant sections. There should also be links to other policies and procedures of relevance. The dates of approval and revision should be included, to ensure that your documentation is up-to-date.
Activity 3A
3.2 – Integrate documentation and record keeping requirements into policies and procedures
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Document and record compliance measures.
Documenting and recording compliance measures
Your organisation will have specific requirements regarding the documentation and maintenance of records associated with the various areas of compliance. You should include such requirements in your policies and procedures, for access by relevant personnel. It is essential for auditors to be able to obtain information about the steps that you have taken to achieve compliance. The relevant documents should be stored for ready access.
You should ensure that your compliance documentation is:
⮚ Accurate – Highlighting the exact steps and procedures that have been undertaken in order to ensure compliance
⮚ Accessible – Using appropriate means of storage
⮚ Detailed – Ensuring that all of the relevant details are included for the benefit of employees and auditors
⮚ Clear and user-friendly – Written in terms that the readers can understand. Giving an accurate picture of how the organisation is meeting compliance requirements
⮚  Compatible with different forms of technology – Ensuring that the documentation can be accessed on the devices and systems that are used by employees and auditors.
Employees should be aware of the need to:
⮚ Write documentation in the appropriate style and tone
⮚ Focus on the requirements of expected readers
⮚ Maintain consistent formatting
⮚ Check and update documentation on a regular basis.
Inclusion of information
There may be strict requirements regarding the types of information that you include in written documentation. It may be necessary to write and format your documents in accordance with style guides and established conventions. Templates may assist you in the completion of data entry tasks.
These textual elements should be considered:
⮚ Language – The choice of language will depend upon your intended audience. It is generally advisable to write in a simple style for general understanding. Direct phrases and active verb tenses should be used when giving instructions. Any technical terms or jargon should be explained at the beginning of your documentation
⮚ Style – There are bound to be stylistic conventions specific to the types of documents that you are producing. Appropriate typography and balances of colour may be used for readability and quality of presentation. Particular wording styles should be applied consistently
⮚ Format – You should ensure consistency in the formatting of your documents. The choice of headings, fonts, bullet points, and other stylistic elements should be maintained. You are advised to make use of document templates
⮚ Drafting – You might have to produce numerous drafts and obtain organisational approval before documents are finalised for distribution. Outlines may be used in the organisation of information
⮚ Editing – Poor standards of grammar and punctuation will reflect badly on your business. It is advisable to use word checking tools once the information has been entered. However, you should also take the time to read through and ask colleagues for feedback. Consider the organisation and logical progression of your documentation.
Record-keeping requirements
You may be aware of laws and organisational requirements regarding the storage of information about compliance. You may be required to keep details about the ways in which you have satisfied legal and ethical compliance requirements. You should include details of the management of relevant files in your policies and procedures. Employees should be aware of file naming and storage conventions. It may be necessary to restrict access to particular personnel and ensure that the documentation is regularly updated. Compliance documentation may be kept for a specific amount of time and then disposed of appropriately.
Activity 3B
3.3 – Ensure systems protect client information
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Take measures to protect client information.
Protecting client information
Your organisation may be required to ensure the confidentiality of various types of client information. It may be necessary to arrange systems for the protection of written records, video/audio tapes, radiographic films and images, and computer files. You might also need to take precautions when communicating verbally with clients.
The risks to client information include:
⮚ Exposure by employees
⮚ Virus/malware
⮚ Data being transferred between premises – lost/stolen
⮚ Insufficient data security.
Your organisation may use the following systems for protecting client information:
⮚ Dedicated servers
⮚ Data encryption
⮚ Maintaining back-ups of essential files
⮚ Regularly updated anti-virus and firewall protection
⮚ Training staff on appropriate means of data storage and protection
⮚ Restricting the transfer of sensitive data
⮚ Limiting access to particular personnel
⮚ Disposing of documents in the appropriate manner
⮚ Using computer file wiping programmes.
You can assess the effectiveness of your data protection strategies in different ways. You should include relevant details in your policies and ensure that they are read by your employees. You may also raise the issue of data protection during business meetings. Ask your employees to detail their concerns and make suggestions for improvement. Consider ‘what if’ scenarios and test your systems regularly.
Essential business laws
The need to maintain confidentiality is outlined in various Australian and international laws. The main aspect of confidentiality requirements is The Privacy Act. This is an Australian law that came into force in 1988 and governs how organisations handle personal information about people, whether staff, clients or customers, etc.
The Privacy Act comprises of 13 Privacy Principles that legally must be adhered to and also, as explained by the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) website:
⮚ “Regulates the collection, storage, use, disclosure, security and disposal of individuals' tax file numbers
⮚ Permits the handling of health information for health and medical research purposes in certain circumstances, where researchers are unable to seek individuals' consent
⮚ Allows the information commissioner to approve and register enforceable app codes that have been developed by an app code developer, or developed by the information commissioner directly
⮚ Permits a small business operator, who would otherwise not be subject to the Australian privacy principles (apps) and any relevant privacy code, to opt-in to being covered by the apps and any relevant app code
⮚ Allows for privacy regulations to be made.”
Further information on the Privacy Act can be found on the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) website, which is included within the references section at the end of this Learner Guide.
Privacy legislation
You need to be able to protect client data and respect the relationships you have – if you fail to do this, they can likely move to your competitors.
Privacy is governed by the Privacy Act 1988 (Privacy Act), which regulates the handling of personal information.
As of March 2014, the following privacy legislation amendments came into effect:
⮚ Privacy Amendment (Enhancing Privacy Protection) Act 2012
⮚ Privacy Regulation 2013
⮚ Credit Reporting Privacy Code.
You can read more about the privacy law reform at: www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-act/privacy-law- reform
There are 13 Australian Privacy Principles that apply to the handling of personal information, contained in Schedule 1 of the Privacy Act:
1. Open and transparent management of personal information
2. Anonymity and pseudonymity
3. Collection of solicited personal information
4. Dealing with unsolicited personal information
5. Notification of the collection of personal information
6. Use or disclosure of personal information
7. Direct marketing
8. Cross-border disclosure of personal information
9. Adoption, use or disclosure of government related identifiers
10. Quality of personal information
11. Security of personal information
12. Access to personal information
13. Correction of personal information.
Full information on the Privacy Act and its terms can be found at www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy- act/the-privacy-act.
Activity 3C
3.4 – Nominate the roles and responsibilities of different people in meeting requirements where multiple people are involved
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify their compliance responsibilities.
Compliance responsibilities
It is likely that your organisation will be required to satisfy numerous compliance requirements. It will be necessary to monitor compliance with laws and regulations, identify potential compliance breaches, and find ways of addressing them. You should write policies and procedures in accordance with compliance standards and file reports to the relevant authorities. However, the compliance responsibilities will ideally be shared between multiple members of your workforce. This is particularly important for large organisations, which have to meet a wide range of compliance requirements. Duties should be shared fairly among workers with the required skills and knowledge to minimise the risks of non-compliance.
These employees should assume responsibility for compliance:
⮚ Chief executive officer
⮚ Director of Compliance
⮚ Head of Compliance
⮚ Frontline and senior managers
⮚ Fraud Investigators
⮚ Compliance specialists at the operational level.
Relevant external personnel may include:
⮚ Legal and business advisors and consultants with expertise in compliance management
⮚ Representatives of professional associations and institutes relevant to the organisation's operations and sphere of business
⮚ Representatives of relevant authorities in pertinent compliance areas.
Ensuring that compliance is maintained by the organisation
Employees should work together in the aim of meeting business objectives and upholding legislative responsibilities. It is quite possible that separate departments will identify means of working in
accordance with compliance. Effective measures may be shared throughout the organisation for the purpose of maintaining compliance.
Additional compliance responsibilities and functions:
⮚ Developing and monitoring complaint handling systems
⮚ Maintaining compliance related management information systems
⮚ Ensuring continuous improvement of processes for compliance, including monitoring, evaluation, and review
⮚ Organising corporate induction and training processes for compliance management
⮚ Documenting compliance requirements relevant to the organisation
⮚ Liaising with relevant internal and external personnel on compliance related matters
⮚ Distributing information on compliance issues throughout the organisation
⮚ Organising and maintaining records about compliance
⮚ Reporting processes on compliance management including reports on breaches and rectification action
⮚ Specifying compliance management functions, accountabilities, and responsibilities.
Activity 3D
3.5 – Distribute policies, procedures and legal information to colleagues and peers in a timely fashion
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Distribute information organisational policies and procedures to colleagues
⮚ Distribute legal information to colleagues.
Distributing information to colleagues
It is important to ensure that colleagues and peers receive information on the introduction of new policies, procedures, and legislation. They may be required to change their working practices and take additional measures to minimise the risk of compliance breaches. The communication will be deemed effective if all of the relevant employees are aware of changing roles and responsibilities.
You should distribute the following policies:
⮚ Ethical policies – Highlighting the ethical principles that should be maintained by employees
⮚ HR policies – Addressing issues such as employment, redundancy, and salary adjustments
⮚ Customer service policies – Detailing the appropriate means of communicating with customers
⮚ Accountancy policies – Providing essential guidance on financial practices, including the recording of sales and acceptance of financial gifts.
Business procedures
The procedures should highlight the means of achieving the aims set out in your company policies. You may have procedures relating to the everyday duties that employees have to perform. Procedures will also have to be followed when hiring new staff members and supervising activities, where there is some element of risk. Your workers should follow procedures when organising time off and dealing with instances of discrimination in the workplace. There is a good chance that you’ll introduce new procedures and make adjustments over time. It will be necessary to provide your employees with details of new or modified procedures.
Legal information
There are bound to be numerous laws and items of legislation that apply to your business. You will have to ensure that all of your employees are aware of their legal responsibilities, so that you avoid any breaches of compliance. You should monitor changes in the legal framework and distribute information
at the appropriate times. It may be necessary to make changes to legal documents for general understanding. You should also present legal information in accessible formats for your workers.
You may use the following means of communication:
⮚ Noticeboard postings
⮚ Intranet or business network
⮚ Presentations
⮚ Staff handbooks
⮚ Emails
⮚ Formal letters
⮚ Newsletters
⮚ Notes in regularly accessed areas
⮚ Cloud servers
⮚ Reports.
Considering the choices
The choice of communication method will depend on the types of information that you are sending. Brief procedural updates may be written on notes or communicated via the intranet. Major legal changes may be communicated in reports and newsletters. Consider the types of technologies and communication mediums that are regularly used by your staff members. Give the workers enough time to consider, respond, and implement any necessary changes.
Activity 3E
Summative Assessments
At the end of your Learner Workbook, you will find the Summative Assessments. This includes:
⮚ Skills assessment
⮚ Knowledge assessment
⮚ Performance assessment.
This holistically assesses your understanding and application of the skills, knowledge and performance requirements for this unit. Once this is completed, you will have finished this unit and be ready to move onto the next one – well done!
References
These suggested references are for further reading and do not necessarily represent the contents of this unit.
Websites
Australian consumer law: www.consumerlaw.gov.au
The Department of health: http://www.health.gov.au/
All references correct as of 30/05/2019 unless otherwise specified.

1. You are given information on one policy and procedure on legal and/or ethical practice. You must document this, making sure it is clear and understandable to others.
"The Sex Discrimination Act 1984
The Sex Discrimination Act 1984 explains that it is unlawful to discriminate against someone based on their sex, marital status, pregnancy or potential pregnancy. It sets out laws against sexual harassment as well as dismissal from work based on family duties including pregnancy.
According to the Act, it is unlawful to refuse to provide goods or services, education or employment based on a person's sex. The Act also covers discrimination within awards and enterprise bargaining, insurance and superannuation, Commonwealth laws and programs, and accommodation.
Sexual harassment is included in the Act because it is a form of discrimination to treat a person unfairly because of their sex."
*
2. How would you ensure that the policy and procedure are readily accessible?
*
3. Use the following table to outline record-keeping requirements specific to your organisation or an example organisation. Provide three examples.
*
4. What systems can you use to protect customer information? (Identify five).
*
5. For one of these systems, explain how this protects client information (you may need to perform brief research for your answer).
*
6. For your organisation or area of business, identify three compliance roles and the personnel you would allocate these to. (The personnel can be identified as work roles, for example, a worker, a manager or a compliance specialist).
*
7. Provide details of the duties that they would fulfil.
*
8. Which methods can you use to distribute policies, procedures, and legal information? (Identify five ways).
*
9. Why is it important to communicate such information in a timely fashion?
*