The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit
Pre-requisite Unit
None stated Unit Sector N/A
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
4. Monitor compliance  4.1 Evaluate work practices for non-compliance on an ongoing
basis, and implement modifications
4.2 Maintain and update required accreditations or certifications
4.3 Refer issues or breaches of ethical or legal practice to relevant people
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Determined the scope of legal and ethical compliance requirements and responsibilities, and developed policies and procedures for at least 1 workplace or business
⮚ Developed a strategic response to at least 3 different situations where legal or ethical requirements have been breached.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Legal responsibilities and liabilities of managers and others in different types of organisation
⮚ Legal and ethical frameworks (international, national state/territory, local), how these apply in the workplace, and the responsibilities of managers in the development and monitoring of policies and procedures, including those related to:
o children in the workplace
o codes of conduct
o codes of practice
o complaints management
o continuing professional education
o discrimination
o dignity of risk
o duty of care
o human rights:
▪  universal declaration of human rights
▪  relationship between human needs and human rights
▪  frameworks, approaches and instruments used in the workplace
o informed consent
o mandatory reporting
o practice standards
o practitioner/client boundaries
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o policy frameworks
o records management
o rights and responsibilities of workers, employers and clients
o industrial relations legislation and requirements relevant to organisation
o specific requirements in the area of work, including:
▪  key practices that are prohibited by law
▪  auditing and inspection regimes
▪  main consequences of non-compliance
▪  need to apply for licences and associated mandatory training and certification requirements
▪  statutory reporting requirements
▪  business insurances required including public liability and workers compensation
▪  accreditation requirements
▪  requirements to develop and implement plans, policies, codes of conduct or incorporate certain workplace practice
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations of different people
o work health and safety
⮚ Sources of information and advice on compliance including:
o local, state/territory or commonwealth government departments or regulatory agencies
o industry associations
o plain English documentation that explains legislation
⮚ Functions and operating procedures of regulatory authorities of particular relevance to the health and community service sectors
⮚ Methods of receiving updated information on requirements
⮚ Use of policies and procedures in managing compliance and ethical practice in both internal work practice and external service delivery
⮚ Formats for policies and procedures and what they should include
⮚ Techniques for monitoring compliance.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. The following conditions must be met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
o current legislation and regulations
o workplace policies and procedures
⮚ Modelling of industry operating conditions, including:
o use of real or simulated organisation for which the candidate develops policies and procedures
o integration of problem solving activities.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
4. Monitor compliance
4.1.  Evaluate work practices for non-compliance on an ongoing basis, and implement modifications
4.2.  Maintain and update required accreditations or certifications
4.3.  Refer issues or breaches of ethical or legal practice to relevant people
4.1 – Evaluate work practices for non-compliance on an ongoing basis, and implement modifications
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Evaluate work practices for non-compliance on an ongoing basis
⮚ Take measures to deal with non-compliance.
Considering instances of non-compliance
It is particularly important to identify compliance breaches. They can have an overwhelmingly negative impact on perceptions of your business and limit the prospects of continued success. You should carry out workplace observations and inspections to ascertain whether compliance standards are being maintained. There may be a need to monitor some business processes on an everyday basis. Other work practices may be considered during comprehensive compliance audits. You are encouraged to arrange regular meetings and invite your workers to raise any concerns about compliance issues.
It will be important to account for all of the relevant laws and ethical standards which relate to your business. Your business practices should be reviewed and analysed in light of the rules and standards. You might use a checklist to ensure that all of the relevant aspects of compliance are considered. The findings should be documented and presented to senior members of your organisation. They will have to decide on suitable strategies to ensure ongoing compliance.
You may identify the following types of non-compliance:
⮚ Health and safety
⮚ Environmental
⮚ Customer service
⮚ Personal (discrimination, harassment etc.)
⮚ Data storage and security.
Dealing with non-compliance
It is important to respond quickly and limit the impact of any compliance problems. However, thorough evaluation and planning will be necessary if you are to avoid any recurrences in the future. You must decide on how best to communicate the reasons for compliance issues and highlight the importance of change. Your employees may be resistant to further training and mentoring. It might even be necessary to relocate, as a consequence of environmental issues. However, you may overcome resistance by involving employees in key discussions and allowing them to have a say in plans for the future.
Transparency is recommended in order to maintain positive relationships with customers, employees, and business associates. People will appreciate your honesty and trust you to take the appropriate action. Managers and other influential business representatives should set a positive example for the workforce to follow.
Activity 4A
4.2 – Maintain and update required accreditations or certifications
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Maintain and update required accreditations or certifications.
Legal and professional responsibilities
Your business may be legally required to maintain and update a variety of accreditations and certifications. The required standards will vary in accordance with the specialisation of your business. You might have to prove compliance with rules on the provision of alcohol to certain customers, or laws regarding the discrimination in the workplace. You might deem it necessary to hold certain certifications as proof of the high standards that your business has achieved in a particular market. You may assign responsibilities for monitoring and identifying the need for new accreditations and certifications. It will also be necessary to maintain standards in case of audits and inspections.
There may be regulatory bodies responsible for establishing and maintaining standards in your industry. They will be primarily concerned with protecting the public and ensuring that your organisation remains in compliance. Examples of highly regulated sectors include Australian health and community service.
Organisations in these sectors have to register with the government and other regulatory agencies. They have to obtain licenses and follow specific laws. Individuals working in the healthcare sector must apply for national registration and accreditation.
The national registration and accreditation scheme covers the following professions:
⮚ Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health practice
⮚ Chinese medicine
⮚ Chiropractic
⮚ Dental practice
⮚ Medicine
⮚ Medical radiation practice
⮚ Nursing and midwifery
⮚ Occupational therapy
⮚ Optometry
⮚ Osteopathy
⮚ Pharmacy
⮚ Physiotherapy
⮚ Podiatry
⮚ Psychology.
Organisations may also obtain accreditation and certifications for:
⮚ Achieving specified levels of diversity
⮚ Acting in accordance with environmental legislation
⮚ Restricting product and service access to certain groups
⮚ Maintaining fairness and equality in the workplace
⮚ Providing excellent customer service
⮚ Maintaining high standards of health and safety.
You are advised to keep records of the standards that should be maintained and the dates
of re-application for accreditations and certifications. It might be necessary to contact the regulatory bodies and arrange assessments of your workplace. You should also carry out regular reviews and make adjustments in accordance with any updates in accreditation or certification.
Activity 4B
4.3 – Refer issues or breaches of ethical or legal practice to relevant people
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Refer issues or breaches of ethical or legal practice to relevant colleagues.
Breaches of compliance
Breaches of compliance may result in governmental reviews, fines, and forced redundancies. However, businesses can avoid these negative scenarios by monitoring and responding to changes in legislation and working practices. Principle 10 of the AS 3806 standard specifies that it isn’t sufficient to have policies in place for the satisfaction of compliance requirements. Businesses are also required to monitor and evaluate the success of their compliance strategies.
There are various ways of responding to compliance breaches. Product returns may be accepted and replacements offered in the event of customer complaints. Employees who fail to abide by the code of conduct may be appropriately disciplined and warned about future action. It may also be necessary to pay fines and produce documents to prove that the organisation has changed its non-compliant practices. Timely action will be required if you are to limit the impact of compliance breaches. You are also encouraged to establish clear schedules for the resolution of non-compliant practices.
Informing relevant internal and external personnel
There should be clear reporting procedures in place, to ensure that organisations are in compliance with the relevant legislation and business rules. All members of the organisation should be aware of the appropriate reporting procedures. They should know who to communicate with regarding the non- compliance of employees in positions of authority.
Businesses may choose to enlist the assistance of third-party experts, with the knowledge required to address breaches of compliance. Book-keepers and other financial experts may be hired to ensure that the business accounts are in order. Legal experts may be called upon to deal with specific legislative issues. A report should be issued upon the successful resolution of compliance breaches. It may detail the actions taken and the involvement of different staff members. The effects of any action should be closely monitored.
You may also have to communicate instances of non-compliance to external personnel, representing:
⮚ Educational institutions and organisations
⮚ Government departments
⮚ Professional associations and institutes
⮚ State/territory or national licensing authorities
⮚ State/territory or national statutory standards authorities
⮚ State/territory, national or international regulatory authorities.
Activity 4C
Summative Assessments
At the end of your Learner Workbook, you will find the Summative Assessments. This includes:
⮚ Skills assessment
⮚ Knowledge assessment
⮚ Performance assessment.
This holistically assesses your understanding and application of the skills, knowledge and performance requirements for this unit. Once this is completed, you will have finished this unit and be ready to move onto the next one – well done!
References
These suggested references are for further reading and do not necessarily represent the contents of this unit.
Websites
Australian consumer law: www.consumerlaw.gov.au
The Department of health: http://www.health.gov.au/
All references correct as of 30/05/2019 unless otherwise specified.
1. In relation to your organisation or area of work, identify a way that you can evaluate work practices for non-compliance on an ongoing basis. Document your process and include how you would implement any required modifications to these work practices.
*
2. Identify five examples of accreditation or certification that apply to your business.
*
3. What steps can an organisation take to ensure that it maintains and updates its accreditation and certification?
*
