This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to research information about compliance and ethical practice responsibilities, and then develop and monitor policies and procedures to meet those responsibilities.
This unit applies to people working in roles with managerial responsibility for legal and ethical compliance in small to medium sized organisations. There may or may not be a team of workers involved.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit
Pre-requisite Unit
None stated Unit Sector N/A
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
5. Maintain knowledge of compliance requirements
5.1 Identify and use opportunities to maintain knowledge of current and emerging legal requirements and ethical issues
5.2 Share updated knowledge and information with peers and colleagues
5.3 Pro-actively engage in process of review and improvement.
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Determined the scope of legal and ethical compliance requirements and responsibilities, and developed policies and procedures for at least 1 workplace or business
⮚ Developed a strategic response to at least 3 different situations where legal or ethical requirements have been breached.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Legal responsibilities and liabilities of managers and others in different types of organisation
⮚ Legal and ethical frameworks (international, national state/territory, local), how these apply in the workplace, and the responsibilities of managers in the development and monitoring of policies and procedures, including those related to:
o children in the workplace
o codes of conduct
o codes of practice
o complaints management
o continuing professional education
o discrimination
o dignity of risk
o duty of care
o human rights:
▪  universal declaration of human rights
▪  relationship between human needs and human rights
▪  frameworks, approaches and instruments used in the workplace
o informed consent
o mandatory reporting
o practice standards
o practitioner/client boundaries
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o policy frameworks
o records management
o rights and responsibilities of workers, employers and clients
o industrial relations legislation and requirements relevant to organisation
o specific requirements in the area of work, including:
▪  key practices that are prohibited by law
▪  auditing and inspection regimes
▪  main consequences of non-compliance
▪  need to apply for licences and associated mandatory training and certification requirements
▪  statutory reporting requirements
▪  business insurances required including public liability and workers compensation
▪  accreditation requirements
▪  requirements to develop and implement plans, policies, codes of conduct or incorporate certain workplace practice
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations of different people
o work health and safety
⮚ Sources of information and advice on compliance including:
o local, state/territory or commonwealth government departments or regulatory agencies
o industry associations
o plain English documentation that explains legislation
⮚ Functions and operating procedures of regulatory authorities of particular relevance to the health and community service sectors
⮚ Methods of receiving updated information on requirements
⮚ Use of policies and procedures in managing compliance and ethical practice in both internal work practice and external service delivery
⮚ Formats for policies and procedures and what they should include
⮚ Techniques for monitoring compliance.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. The following conditions must be met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
o current legislation and regulations
o workplace policies and procedures
⮚ Modelling of industry operating conditions, including:
o use of real or simulated organisation for which the candidate develops policies and procedures
o integration of problem solving activities.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
5. Maintain knowledge of compliance requirements
5.1.  Identify and use opportunities to maintain knowledge of current and emerging legal requirements and ethical issues
5.2.  Share updated knowledge and information with peers and colleagues
5.3.  Pro-actively engage in process of review and improvement
5.1 – Identify and use opportunities to maintain knowledge of current and emerging legal requirements and ethical issues
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify new legal requirements
⮚ Identify new ethical issues.
Maintaining knowledge of legal requirements and ethical issues
It is essential to ensure that your business operates in compliance with all of the applicable legal requirements and ethical standards. The amount of regulation will vary in accordance with the size and specialisation of your business. You may be aware that there are numerous laws applicable to the insurance and bar service industries. Such companies might deem it necessary to employ dedicated legal staff for the purpose of identifying legal requirements. However, the owners of small businesses may rely on different types of legal assistance.
Investigating legal requirements
You will need to monitor and adapt to changes in legislation if you are to avoid potentially costly compliance breaches. It will be necessary to review the licenses, registrations, contracts and leases that apply to your company. You’ll find that there are a variety of legal firms and specialist lawyers that can help to develop and implement compliance measures. They should help you to identify any licensing requirements and make the necessary applications. You may also require assistance when it comes to the drafting of legal documents and resolution of disputes in the workplace.
Additional legal assistance is provided by the Australian government. You can access a variety of legal guides on the website (http://www.business.gov.au/). You can also use the Australian business license and information service to identify the licences, permits and registrations which apply to your business. There are a variety of legal clinics in the different states of Australia offering guidance on issues such as debt recovery, employment law, and business law.
You should take the following legal issues into account:
⮚ Privacy
⮚ Anti-discrimination
⮚ Consent to medical treatment
⮚ Duty of care
⮚ Release of client information
⮚ Child protection
⮚ Industrial relations
⮚ Trade practices
⮚ Equal Employment Opportunity
⮚ Occupational health and safety
⮚ Contractual obligations
⮚ Licensing laws.
Considering the ethical issues
There are a range of ethical issues that will apply to your business. Employees should act with integrity and treat their colleagues with due respect. You also have a responsibility to consider the requirements of diverse ethnic and cultural groups. You should base employment decisions on relevant skills and knowledge, rather than issues of race or religion. It is also important to make ethical decisions and give employees a chance to contribute. You should assess the workplace in light of your ethical principles and ensure that the workers are given opportunities to voice any concerns. Audits should be carried out to ensure that the business is committed to maintaining its ethical principles.
You may also consider these forms of research:
⮚ Workplace observations
⮚ Surveys
⮚ Interviews
⮚ Questionnaires
⮚ Complaint reviews.
Activity 5A
5.2 – Share updated knowledge and information with peers and colleagues
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Share their updated knowledge and information with peers and colleagues.
Communicating compliance
It is necessary to ensure that colleagues and peers are aware of the compliance information specific to your organisation. However, you will face a challenge when it comes to the communication of such details. Employees may be loath to spend large amounts of time reading about legislation and company policies. They may feel that their time is better spent focussing on the development of products and business strategies. However, there are some proven ways of enhancing compliance communications. The messages should be simple, direct, and relevant to the business audience. It is important to identify individual information requirements and create appropriate communications.
You may inform peers and colleagues of:
⮚ New policies and procedures that are being introduced by your organisation
⮚ The development of best practices
⮚ Relevant legislation and business registrations/licences
⮚ Agreed strategies for overcoming compliance risks
⮚ Positive steps that have been taken towards the achievement of legal and ethical compliance
⮚ Information about helpful compliance research sources.
It is advisable to use a variety of communication channels to spread the word about compliance. You should focus on the concerns of the readership and address individual staff members appropriately. Comprehensive training may be required for those employees in high-risk departments. It should be tailored in accordance with the relevance of risk. Regular emails and newsletters should be sent to those employees are directly affected by compliance issues. However, basic documents may be provided and signed off by those at little risk.
You can use these means of sharing knowledge and information:
⮚ Posters
⮚ Press releases
⮚ Games
⮚ Websites
⮚ Emails
⮚ Social media feeds
⮚ Newsletters
⮚ Intranet
⮚ Blogs.
Importance of regular communication
You are encouraged to create a plan for the development and circulation of communications about compliance. You should maintain regular contact with employees and provide information about compliance in short and easily comprehensible bursts. This will mean that your employees are continuously aware of compliance issues.
Your communication strategy may include:
⮚ Attendance of relevant conferences, seminars, etc. dealing with relevant aspects of applicable compliance requirements and related compliance management
⮚ Hardcopy and electronic newsletters either dedicated to compliance management issues or having a section dealing with compliance management issues
⮚ Nominated internal contacts linked to an established network of external contacts in relevant regulatory authorities and other organisations with an interest in applicable compliance requirements
⮚ Presentations and papers at conferences or in relevant journals covering relevant aspects of the organisation's compliance program/management system
⮚ Production and distribution of external documentation requirements including press releases, published information on compliance policies, and organisational initiatives for compliance management, submissions and reports to regulatory authorities, and others with an interest in applicable compliance requirements
⮚ Production and distribution of internal documentation requirements, including overall specification of the compliance
program/management system, procedures, standards, organisational structures, descriptions of staff roles and responsibilities, information on compliance program/management system components, breach management policies, and procedures
⮚ Subscription to and/or systematic access and review of, relevant publications and periodicals dealing with relevant aspects of applicable compliance requirements and related compliance management.
Activity 5B
5.3 – Pro-actively engage in process of review and improvement
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Review business compliance
⮚ Improve business compliance.
Reviewing business compliance
It will be necessary to monitor and evaluate the success of compliance measures taken by your organisation. You are advised to create checklists for evaluating the various aspects of compliance. Transactions and quality checks may be reviewed. The means of interaction with customers may be monitored, to ensure that employees are acting in the proper manner. Sales presentations and meetings with suppliers may also be attended and inspected for compliance.
It is important for employees to be able to access sources of information regarding the implementation of compliance measures. You may include such details in written manuals and digital communications about compliance. You should carry out regular research and ensure that employees are updated on legislation and suitable business practices. Any explanations of relevant laws should be written in plain English, for the benefit of all employees. You are also advised to establish metrics for the evaluation of your compliance program. Consider the impact that compliance measures are having on the achievement of your business objectives. Keep records of compliance tests and strategies that have been used to overcome breaches.
You may use the following means of gathering information about compliance:
⮚ Business inspections
⮚ Consultations with internal personnel
⮚ Details of customer complaints
⮚ Communication with auditors, consultants, and others with compliance expertise
⮚ Publications containing relevant articles on business compliance
⮚ Discussions with government representatives and organisations with responsibility for regulation
⮚ Contact with relevant industry associations.
Compliance audits
You are advised to carry out regular compliance audits, to ensure that standards of ethical and legal compliance are being maintained. Employees should be aware of their responsibilities and have a comprehensive understanding of the relevant compliance requirements. Various members of the organisation should be questioned. It will be necessary to identify any areas of concern and develop strategies to ensure that relevant standards are met.
Gap analysis
You should carry out a step by step analysis of business processes and consider whether they are being undertaken in accordance with compliance criteria. A gap analysis will allow you to identify any forms of legislation and effective practices which haven’t necessarily been considered. It will involve an analysis of your present business situation in light of expectations regarding future compliance. You may consult relevant members of the organisation and access business data on the effectiveness of your compliance measures. Then develop a plan to meet your compliance objectives.
You should consider these means of obtaining feedback:
⮚ Customer surveys, hotlines, and focus groups
⮚ Statistical data collection
⮚ Consultations with key decision makers
⮚ Peer reviews
⮚ Digital communication
⮚ Interviews with customers and employees.
Key performance indicators
There should be analysis of feedback, based upon agreed key performance indicators (KPIs). It is essential to evaluate the steps that are being taken to improve the compliance of your organisation, the effectiveness and reliability of compliance systems, and the impact of implemented procedures. You should present such information clearly, for general understanding. Graphs and other visual elements may be used to highlight the effect of compliance measures over time. The organisation should be progressing towards the achievement of compliance objectives.
You may consider these KPIs:
⮚ Content of reports of breaches of compliance requirements
⮚ Number and details of alleged breaches of relevant laws, codes, and organisational standards
⮚ Number and details of complaints recorded that are related to compliance requirements and action taken
⮚ Operational costs of the compliance program/management system
⮚ Reported problems in the operation of the complaints management system
⮚ Reports on action taken in the event of a breach in compliance requirements
⮚ Results of assessments of skills and knowledge of managers and operations staff in terms of the organisation's compliance requirements, the compliance program/management system and their individual roles, accountabilities and responsibilities.
Activity 5C
Summative Assessments
At the end of your Learner Workbook, you will find the Summative Assessments. This includes:
⮚ Skills assessment
⮚ Knowledge assessment
⮚ Performance assessment.
This holistically assesses your understanding and application of the skills, knowledge and performance requirements for this unit. Once this is completed, you will have finished this unit and be ready to move onto the next one – well done!
References
These suggested references are for further reading and do not necessarily represent the contents of this unit.
Websites
Australian consumer law: www.consumerlaw.gov.au
The Department of health: http://www.health.gov.au/
All references correct as of 30/05/2019 unless otherwise specified.
1. Identify four methods you can use to maintain your knowledge of current and emerging legal requirements and ethical issues relating to the workplace.
*
2. Provide one example of an opportunity that could help you to maintain your legal and ethical knowledge. (This can be from real experience, or it may be a suggestion).
*
3. Identify one piece of information relating to legal and ethical practice; this may be related to your organisation or to your business industry. Produce a short written communication to explain this. This should be one paragraph of text that is written in an informative style, such as a newsletter article or a press release.
*
4. Choose an example activity that takes place at your organisation, or within your business industry (for example, client home visits, dispensing medications, communications or record-keeping). 
Provide a plan that you could use to review this; this will include: 
*The process you would go through to review this activity 
*What information you would need to obtain for your assessment 
*How you would gather information and evidence (including methods and tools)
The order of activities for your review and how these would be scheduled What you would want to assess information and evidence for, and any compliance information you would use to assess this against 
*How you would determine improvements (for example, analysis of processes, seeking opinions and feedback, or assessment of key performance indicators).