Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to assist clients to identify their rights, voice their needs and concerns and realise their interests, rights and needs.
This unit applies to workers of all levels in a range of health or community services settings who provide services using a human rights based approach and have direct interaction with clients.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit
Pre-requisite Unit
None stated
Unit Sector
None Stated
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
2. Advocate in accordance with client preferences and requests to optimise client outcomes
2.1 Undertake an assessment to identify client’s ability to advocate for self
2.2 Initiate, negotiate and implement relevant strategies for addressing client rights and needs in collaboration with the client
2.3 Identify potential barriers as well as resources
2.4 Identify and contact the most appropriate individuals and/or organisations and represent the client to optimise outcomes for the client
2.5 Ensure information is kept in confidence unless authorisation is given to release it
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills)
that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be demonstrated evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Worked in collaboration with 1 client to identify their interests, needs and rights
⮚ Advocated on behalf of 1 client to achieve a specific outcome
⮚ Supported 1 client throughout an organisational or legal complaints process.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage the task and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Universal Declaration of Human Rights
⮚ Relationship between human needs and human rights
⮚ Human rights frameworks, approaches, instruments
⮚ Legal and ethical considerations (international, national, state/territory, local) related to facilitation of client rights and interests and how these impact individual workers:
o duty of care
o human rights
o mandatory reporting
o discrimination
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o informed consent
o organisation and legal complaints processes
o rights and responsibilities of clients, workers and organisations
⮚ Common risks to client safety and wellbeing
⮚ Relevance of child protection across all health and community services contexts, including duty of care when child is not the client, indicators of risk and adult disclosure
⮚ Actions that constitute discrimination and techniques for addressing it
⮚ Types of community resources, networks and referral options relevant to the nature of client service
⮚ Potential conflict between client needs and organisation requirements
⮚ Differences between negotiation, advocacy, mediation
⮚ Negotiation, advocacy, mediation techniques for the facilitation of client rights
⮚ Empowerment and disempowerment.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. Where simulation is used, it must reflect real working conditions by modelling industry operating conditions and contingencies, as well as, using suitable facilities, equipment and resources.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
2. Advocate in accordance with client preferences and requests to optimise client outcomes
2.1.  Undertake an assessment to identify client’s ability to advocate for self
2.2.  Initiate, negotiate and implement relevant strategies for addressing client rights and needs in collaboration with the client
2.3.  Identify potential barriers as well as resources
2.4.  Identify and contact the most appropriate individuals and/or organisations and represent the client to optimise outcomes for the client
2.5.  Ensure information is kept in confidence unless authorisation is given to release it
2.1 – Undertake an assessment to identify client’s ability to advocate for self
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Conduct an assessment with the client in a respectful and appropriate manner
⮚ Determine, through the process of assessment, if the client can self-advocate
⮚ Follow organisational ethical practices in your assessment.
Assessment
It may be necessary to undertake an assessment with the client and appropriate personnel to determine if they are actually advocating for themselves, as it may not always be so apparent. A client may seem of sound mind and easy to talk to about their problems, but they may also be easily confused and not actually understand the best options for them.
Even if you find that a client requires an advocate, this does not mean that the client should have decisions forced upon them. It will always be your priority to put your client’s needs first and choose the best options to benefit them and their needs, without infringing on their rights or health - both psychological and physical. You may encounter the rare but still difficult situation of finding that an advocate for the client is not choosing the best options for the individual, either intentionally or by accident, which you will need to report to your supervisor.
Assessment to identify client’s ability to advocate for self could include:
⮚ Discussion over simple matters with client
⮚ Asking questions regarding health
⮚ Checking client’s health needs
⮚ Consulting with health professionals and other relevant personnel
⮚ Tests put in place by your organisation.
Remember, as an advocate, you require someone who can speak on behalf of the client
and can argue their needs and requirements. An advocate does not make decisions for the client and equally does not sit on the fence and allow others to make the decisions for them either.
Children
Adults are often presumed to be capable of making their own decisions when it comes to care. Usually, children until the age of sixteen are not seen as capable of making their own decisions; they may refuse treatment that could save their life because it will be uncomfortable or they are afraid.
This creates an ethical dilemma:
You should try to give children autonomy where possible as this can help gain a child’s trust. This is mostly the case when there are options that are not absolutely essential – for example, a child refuses a plaster for a small wound. It is preferable that they have the plaster, but if it is going to cause distress, then you may need to respect their choice.
When children reach sixteen, they can sometimes make their own decisions if found to be capable. If not, responsibility is given to parents/guardians or local authority.
Can you treat a child without consent?
Yes, here are situations where treating a child without consent is acceptable:
⮚ In an emergency
⮚ When parents have neglected the child
⮚ When parents have abandoned the child
⮚ When parents cannot be found.
When a child between sixteen and eighteen is found to be capable and mature enough to make their own decisions and refuses treatment, they can sometimes be overridden. This is sometimes the case when they refuse life-saving treatment.
Activity 2A
2.2 – Initiate, negotiate and implement relevant strategies for addressing client rights and needs in collaboration with the client
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify appropriate strategies to use with the client
⮚ Work together with the client to decide the best strategies to use for providing client care
⮚ Use negotiation techniques in client discussions to help decide which strategies are the best to use.
Strategies
Your organisation will likely already have certain strategies in place for addressing client needs, but you may find that you need to initiate and implement new strategies, depending on the situation. You may need to negotiate strategies to be used with relevant agencies, support services, etc.
Strategies you may have already used could include;
⮚ Public meetings
⮚ Interviews
⮚ Questionnaires
⮚ Court appearances.
As said previously, your organisation may already have strategies in place, but at times, you may need to review the strategies and decide whether any changes need to be made.
Review of strategies may be informal or formal and may include:
⮚ Discussions with key people in the community
⮚ Discussions with friends/family of the client
⮚ Discussions with colleagues and/or clients.
When dealing with advocacy, you will encounter many terms which will all have similar meanings but actually are different in context. Many of these terms are important when considering necessary strategies and working with outside agencies. These terms will include mediation, negotiation, conciliation and cross-cultural issues.
Mediation
Mediation is confidential and is a form of alternative dispute resolution. It would involve an impartial person helping your client and another party reach a solution that's acceptable and helpful to everyone, with the priority being your client. The mediator can talk to both parties either separately or together. As the mediator, you cannot judge or determine outcomes but rather just ask the right questions to come to the best possible solution.
Negotiation
Negotiation is about trying to come to an acceptable agreement or understanding for the client and the client alone. When negotiating, you are trying to gain the best possible outcome with the most benefits, for the client. Even though this seems more one-sided than mediation, respect is still important.
Conciliation
Conciliation is another form of alternative dispute resolution. As the conciliator, you would meet with the necessary parties separately, while trying to resolve any issues. As a conciliator, you must ask the right questions, improve communication, interpret the issues and help come to a solution. A conciliator normally does not have the power to make a decision.
Conciliation, even though similar to mediation, actually looks to purely conciliate and does not necessarily take into account the client’s needs or feelings. They will also not sit with both parties at the same time.
Cross-cultural issues
When working with any client, you will have to consider their personal preferences, religious background and cultural upbringing. All of them play an important part in client care and how they may choose to live their life. You may find that you have been asked to advocate on behalf of a client because a counsellor wants to talk to your client about personal issues, which culturally, they would not normally discuss.
You may come across a number of cross-cultural issues, all of which should be handled with great sensitivity, care and respect. You will need to bear all cultural and religious preferences with advocating on behalf of a client, as this may impact on the decisions and choices made.
Activity 2B
2.3 – Identify potential barriers as well as resources
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Determine through discussions and communications with the client and others, whether there are any barriers to providing care for the client
⮚ Note/record the barriers to providing appropriate client care
⮚ Note/record the resources that are needed to provide the identified client-care.
Barriers and resources
Resources are those elements that you can use to aid you in facilitating the interests and rights of a client and advocating for them. You may need to obtain information from a variety of sources to help you.
Relevant sources of information may be:
⮚ Clients
⮚ Client relatives/friends/carers
⮚ Allied health professionals
⮚ Community/support group
⮚ Nurses
⮚ Care plans
⮚ Discharge plans
⮚ Appropriate training programs
⮚ Health records, such as:
o assessments
o plans of care
o case histories
o progress notes
o test results
o referral records
o observation charts
o medication charts.
Barriers
There could be potential barriers that obstruct the advocating process – example, cultural differences, communication issues,
Barriers could include:
⮚ Communication
⮚ Cultural barriers
⮚ Level of expertise
⮚ Education/training
⮚ Abbreviations/terminology issues.
Cultural differences and needs
Do not assume anything about the client. There may be factors that are influencing their decision to exercise their rights or not. If a client refuses care, it is your job to find out why.
The cultural needs of different people will affect:
⮚ How you speak and communicate with them:
o different cultures and communities have different euphemisms and accents, which you should bear in mind when speaking
o English can potentially be a second language
o some words, terms and phrases may be offensive
⮚ How you provide their care:
o some cultures may be uncomfortable with receiving care from a man
o some cultures, such as Muslims, may require their women to be treated by women
o some cultures may be more averse to receiving and accepting care
o some cultures, particularly Asian and Indian, believe that it is the responsibility of the family to provide care for their aged members
⮚ What care you can provide:
o some cultures, such as Jehovah’s Witnesses, won’t accept blood transfusions
o some may be against organ transplants
⮚ What you can feed them:
o for example, Muslims and Jews cannot eat pork
o Jews require Kosher meals
⮚ Participation in religious or cultural activities:
o members of different religions may need to attend certain events, do particular activities or refrain from particular activities at certain times
o religious festival and events, such as Lent, Christmas and Ramadan.
It is important that you acknowledge and respect cultural differences and any needs and requirements that may arise from this; this is required under anti-discrimination legislation and cultural diversity requirements.
Where you have clients that belong to a particular culture, you should ideally make yourself aware of things they need and what is acceptable and unacceptable for them; this will help you to avoid incidents in which you may inadvertently offend someone. Some clients will point out their beliefs and needs, but some may not and will expect you to know what they need and want.
Activity 2C
2.4 – Identify and contact the most appropriate individuals and/or organisations and represent the client to optimise outcomes for the client
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Access information on the appropriate individuals or organisation that can assist in providing client outcomes
⮚ Make contact with the appropriate individuals or organisations to achieve client outcomes
⮚ Discuss client needs while maintaining their rights and decisions on choices and options for care.
Identifying and contacting individuals/organisations
If your client asks you to help them, it is your duty to do so with the utmost integrity and dedication to gain the best possible outcome to meet their needs. When you speak to anyone on behalf of your client, you need to be aware that you are representing them at all times. Ensuring you understand your client’s point of view, you should communicate the necessary information clearly and concisely, helping you to gain the best outcome for the client.
You may need to identify and contact:
⮚ Next of kin
⮚ Legal representatives
⮚ Doctor/GP
⮚ Therapist/counsellor
⮚ Mental health worker
⮚ Family members or friends
⮚ Social worker.
Throughout consultation with anyone on behalf of your client, you should always keep them informed and up to date, ensuring that they are happy with the way things are going and eventually the outcome.
You can report to the relevant people or organisations in several ways:
⮚ Verbal:
o telephone call
o face-to-face
⮚ Written:
o reports
o case notes
o hazard and incident reports
o care plans
o notes
o emails.
You should also discuss any possible outcomes so that the client is aware of all possibilities. Once the outcome has been realised, you should then inform the client of all of the details and any changes to be made or implemented.
Activity 2D
2.5 – Ensure information is kept in confidence unless authorisation is given to release it
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Follow all data privacy and confidentiality requirements when handling client information
⮚ Disclose information only to authorised persons, following organisational procedures
⮚ Record, handle and store client information safely and appropriately.
Ensuring information is kept confidential
Confidentiality is required by law in certain respects; the privacy of client records is a highly important aspect of confidentiality. Failure to maintain privacy of client records is punishable by law and organisations can be sued by the client.
The Privacy Act 1988 comprises of 13 Privacy Principles that legally must be adhered to and also, as explained by the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) website:
⮚ “Regulates the collection, storage, use, disclosure, security and disposal of individuals' tax file numbers
⮚ Permits the handling of health information for health and medical research purposes in certain circumstances, where researchers are unable to seek individuals' consent
⮚ Allows the information commissioner to approve and register enforceable app codes that have been developed by an app code developer, or developed by the information commissioner directly
⮚ Permits a small business operator, who would otherwise not be subject to the Australian privacy principles (apps) and any relevant privacy code, to opt-in to being covered by the apps and any relevant app code
⮚ Allows for privacy regulations to be made.”
Source: http://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-act/the-privacy-act
The following guidelines serve as a good basis for maintaining client confidentiality:
⮚ Never discuss client information in social circles
⮚ Documented information should only ever relate to service delivery and related factors
⮚ Confidential documents must be stored securely, out of reach of the public and unauthorised personnel
⮚ Client information should never be disclosed to external agencies that are not part of the client's service delivery system
⮚ Names and details of clients should not be disclosed in public forums, e.g. meetings, seminars, etc.
There are cases where confidentiality can be broken:
⮚ If the person is at serious risk of harm
⮚ Where there is an imminent, serious threat to the public or a specific person
⮚ Where there is a police request for information under the Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
⮚ For use by healthcare professional (as long as a recognised standard of treatment is being delivered).
Issues of confidentiality should never be taken lightly – you should discuss them with your supervisor. Senior staff should always be involved for complex, competing decisions, e.g. confidentiality vs Safety.
Sharing information within a team
Even if the client asks that you not share their information with others on your team, it is necessary to do this to ensure service quality is coordinated and of the highest quality. You should inform them of this, explaining that all of the team need to have access to appropriate information to ensure the best outcomes for them. Reassure them that their confidentiality will be maintained outside of a professional context.
The only situation where it may be appropriate to withhold client information from colleagues is when there is a conflict of interest. However, if information isn't shared, it makes team-based care reviews impossible, and appropriate decisions are harder to make.

questions:
1. Give three examples of resources or sources of information.
*
2. Give three examples of barriers.
*
3.  Identify one individual or organisation that you would need to contact to help assist the client. For example, this may be a support organisation, a family member or another person/organisation.Write a short email message to initiate contact; this should include the organisation you are working for (i.e., a company name; for the purpose of this activity, you may choose your own organisational name if one is not provided to you), the reason for your contact, and a few basic details about the client’s situation of need (without providing personal client information, for example, do not provide the client’s full name or contact details, and do not provide any private medical or health information).
*
4. What can you do to help ensure confidentiality?
*
5. What legislation covers confidentiality?
*
6. When can confidentiality be broken?
