Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to assist clients to identify their rights, voice their needs and concerns and realise their interests, rights and needs.
This unit applies to workers of all levels in a range of health or community services settings who provide services using a human rights based approach and have direct interaction with clients.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit
Pre-requisite Unit
None stated
Unit Sector
None Stated
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
3. Provide ongoing support to clients
3.1 Support and encourage clients to exercise their rights and personal preferences without compromising their safety and that of others
3.2 Consult with supervisor, other support workers and the service about interests, rights and needs of clients in a way that upholds their rights and supports their reasonable expectations
3.3 Identify situations of risk or potential risk and refer appropriately
3.4 Apply work practices to minimise potential for harm to clients, self and others
3.5 Conduct all activities in accordance with legal, organisation and duty of care requirements
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills)
that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be demonstrated evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Worked in collaboration with 1 client to identify their interests, needs and rights
⮚ Advocated on behalf of 1 client to achieve a specific outcome
⮚ Supported 1 client throughout an organisational or legal complaints process.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage the task and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Universal Declaration of Human Rights
⮚ Relationship between human needs and human rights
⮚ Human rights frameworks, approaches, instruments
⮚ Legal and ethical considerations (international, national, state/territory, local) related to facilitation of client rights and interests and how these impact individual workers:
o duty of care
o human rights
o mandatory reporting
o discrimination
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o informed consent
o organisation and legal complaints processes
o rights and responsibilities of clients, workers and organisations
⮚ Common risks to client safety and wellbeing
⮚ Relevance of child protection across all health and community services contexts, including duty of care when child is not the client, indicators of risk and adult disclosure
⮚ Actions that constitute discrimination and techniques for addressing it
⮚ Types of community resources, networks and referral options relevant to the nature of client service
⮚ Potential conflict between client needs and organisation requirements
⮚ Differences between negotiation, advocacy, mediation
⮚ Negotiation, advocacy, mediation techniques for the facilitation of client rights
⮚ Empowerment and disempowerment.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. Where simulation is used, it must reflect real working conditions by modelling industry operating conditions and contingencies, as well as, using suitable facilities, equipment and resources.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
3. Provide ongoing support to clients
3.1.  Support and encourage clients to exercise their rights and personal preferences without compromising their safety and that of others
3.2.  Consult with supervisor, other support workers and the service about interests, rights and needs of clients in a way that upholds their rights and supports their reasonable expectations
3.3.  Identify situations of risk or potential risk and refer appropriately
3.4.  Apply work practices to minimise potential for harm to clients, self and others
3.5.  Conduct all activities in accordance with legal, organisation and duty of care requirements
3.1 – Support and encourage clients to exercise their rights and personal preferences without compromising their safety and that of others
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Discuss with the client how best to maintain their safety, and that of others, when deciding on their care options
⮚ Identify with the client their preferences and if their safety, or that of others, may be compromised
⮚ Provide ways to ensure the safety of the client and any others is achieved when providing care.
Supporting client preferences
Clients have the right to assert their preferences about any aspect of their care, whether they are in residential or private accommodation. Clients should be given the opportunity to make decisions and voice their preferences wherever possible.
Client
preference information:
⮚ When clients have preferences that apply to a situation, they should be confirmed with both the client and the supervisor, where required
⮚ Client preferences, requests and stipulations should be recorded in their notes; this ensures that their preferences are not overlooked, misunderstood or miscommunicated; for example, if a client states that they would like to be woken early in the morning so that they can listen to a radio show or watch a television show, this message may not reach the person on duty in the morning if it is only mentioned verbally, or the caregiver forgets to pass on the message
⮚ Other preferences, such as that a client does not like to be called by their first name, should be recorded so that anyone who works with the client is informed of this
⮚ Clients should be consulted as much as possible on aspects of their care and lifestyle; this empowers them and allows them to live more comfortably and happily
⮚ Over time, it is good practice to confirm that clients’ preferences are still accurate by asking them whether they are still satisfied with all aspects of their care. If they express a desire for a change, aim to rectify this ASAP
⮚ Unless clients inform you of changes directly, their preferences may have changed without you knowing – you should consult family members and advocates periodically to check if they are aware of any such desires for change.
Having their particular preferences recorded and accessible allows you to provide a more friendly and personalised service, even if the care worker has never worked with a particular client before. By consulting their notes, they are able to see that they prefer things such as not being called by a nickname, not being touched on their shoulders and that they have difficulty taking tablets. This means that different carers can avoid making mistakes and portraying the service as impersonal by having to ask many questions.
You have a responsibility to ensure a safe environment for the client. You may want to try and empower the client and have them make decisions for themselves and help to give them some independence.
However, you must be careful not be negligent of the risks involved in increased independence. For example, if a client enjoys gardening and there is a garden centre nearby, but the client is suffering from dementia, it would not be appropriate for you to suggest the client goes to the garden centre by themselves as you would be neglecting your duty of care.
Activity 3A
3.2 – Consult with supervisor, other support workers and the service about interests, rights and needs of clients in a way that upholds their rights and supports their reasonable expectations
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Use the most effective method of consultation with others to discuss the rights and needs of the client
⮚ Discuss the rights and needs of the client while maintaining the client’s dignity
⮚ Use gathered information on the client and their situation to ensure the client needs are put forward in consultations.
Consultations
A good method to use when discussing the interests, rights and needs of clients is through a case conference. A case conference is the meeting of a group of health care professionals that provide care to an individual. The service is provided for clients with complex needs and involves a minimum of three practitioners who provide different types of care, e.g. Health Care Worker/Assistant, Nurse and Doctor. A case conference gives the opportunity to health care providers to discuss the needs of the client together and create a plan of action for the client’s ongoing care needs. They can occur in different settings – for people discharged from hospital, residential care settings and in client’s own homes.
A conference may also occur via:
⮚ Face-to face communication
⮚ Telephone
⮚ Video Conference.
The process is the same for all categories of case conferences:
⮚ Discuss a client’s history
⮚ Identify the patient’s multidisciplinary care needs
⮚ Identify outcomes to be achieved by each team member
⮚ Identify tasks that need to be undertaken to achieve these outcomes, and allocate those tasks to members of the case conference team
⮚ Assess whether previously identified outcomes (if any) have been achieved.
Source: http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/mbsprimarycare-caseconf- factsheet.htm
You should prepare for the case conference by gathering any important information to be discussed with the other professionals and any questions that you want to ask or concerns you would like to raise.
Seeking assistance from supervisor
There may be times where you will need to seek assistance from a supervisor or experienced staff member.
⮚ Supervision may be conducted by various means, including:
o in person
o through use of electronic communications media, such as telephone or video conferencing, where necessary
⮚ Frequency of supervision will be determined by factors, such as the task or the maturity of the person being supervised.
Informing a supervisor
You will need to inform a supervisor to ensure that everything has been done to help the client make an informed choice about their care and understands fully the consequences of the refusal.
They may need to consider:
⮚ Confirming the client has capacity to make the decision
⮚ Checking the patient’s understanding and looking for any health literacy or communication issues
⮚ Exploring the reasons for the decision, including:
o a refusal or an inability to sign the form
o any cultural or religious conflict that the patient may have
⮚ Exploring other healthcare options that might be acceptable to them
⮚ Where necessary, provide further explanation of the healthcare and consequences using different methods and
⮚ Additional supporting material.
If a client who has capacity to make decisions continues to decline or withdraw consent, the following can be part of subsequent discussions:
⮚ The consequences and risks of the decision, including how it affects their health care choices, prognosis or outcomes
⮚ That they are entitled to a second opinion and how the health practitioner can facilitate this
⮚ Their decision to decline or withdraw consent for a specific procedure/treatment does not affect the provision of other appropriate healthcare and access to health services.
Source: http://www.health.qld.gov.au/consent/documents/ic-guide.pdf
Activity 3B
3.3 – Identify situations of risk or potential risk and refer appropriately
3.4 – Apply work practices to minimise potential for harm to clients, self and others
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Determine the situations of risk that may apply to the client, the caregiver and any other care providers
⮚ Use risk assessment tools to determine the level of risks that may be associated with the client and their situation of care
⮚ Assess how any discovered risks can be controlled by eliminating or minimising these to safe levels
⮚ Take appropriate actions to control all known risks.
What is potential risk?
There can be several risks posed to both the client and the caregiver within the care industry. These risks need to be assessed as far as possible, especially where there is a real chance of danger. Ideally, your organisation should provide steps that can be implemented as a preventative measure and actions to take in case of accident or injury.
Risks to the client:
⮚ Deterioration of condition: such as through medication side-effects
⮚ Abuse by caregivers, including neglect
⮚ Infection: caught from other clients or carried by the caregiver
⮚ Manual handling incidents, such as being dropped or equipment failing
⮚ Loss of independence
⮚ Damage to self-esteem and self-worth
⮚ Lifestyle upheaval, especially if they are moved into residential care
⮚ Care mistakes and misdiagnosis
⮚ Medication errors.
Risks to the caregiver:
⮚ Manual handling injury and strain
⮚ Accusations from clients, especially mentally unsound ones, of abuse and/or neglect
⮚ Responsibility for error
⮚ Being attacked by a client
⮚ Infection from clients.
Where there is potential for risk, either to the client or the caregiver, this should be discussed with a supervisor. The supervisor and organisational policy may provide you with safeguarding techniques and measures to prevent risks being realised; for example, organisations usually implement infection control measures, manual handling training and specify that mentally unsound clients never be alone with a single caregiver.
Minimising and avoiding risk
Minimising and avoiding risk requires the attention and vigilance of everyone involved; many accidents and incidents occur as a result of inattention, laziness or ignorance and many can be avoided altogether by being alert and following any procedures outlined by the organisation. Minimisation or avoidance procedures and techniques may be specified by the organisation or can be employed by individuals applying common sense.
Organisational procedures may apply to issues specific to the workplace, such as:
⮚ The door to room 4A swings shut very fast, so be careful not to get hit by it
⮚ The stairs to the first floor are very steep, so use the elevator to transport items
⮚ You must wear shoes in the hallway, as the tiles can be slippery if you’re only wearing socks.
General WHS guidance can also be applied:
⮚ If you find a leak, cordon the area off and arrange for repairs
⮚ Sharps and syringes must only be handled by qualified staff and must be disposed of in a sharps box
⮚ Do not exceed the maximum occupancy of the elevator.
These types of precaution should occur to people anyway, and they shouldn’t need to be told specifically what to do or what not to do.
Organisational procedures for managing risks, including those related to manual handling, may be:
⮚ Client assessment documents and care plans
⮚ Safe manual handling procedures that includes use assistive aids, always work in pairs, bend knees when lifting, hold load close to body, do not twist, etc.
⮚ Communication, consultation and issue resolution procedures
⮚ Hazard management documents include policies and procedures on specific hazards as well as hazard and incident reporting (including follow-up to sharps incidents) and investigation, workplace inspections, maintenance, etc.
⮚ Hazard management policies and procedures (these may be integrated with quality, care or other documents or be separated as WHS policies and procedures)
⮚ Human resources management procedures such as harassment and grievance procedures, induction programs, team meetings, management of performance levels, alcohol and drug policies
⮚ Job procedures and work instructions, including medications policy and procedures
⮚ Other related procedures including waste management, security
⮚ Post-incident/injury management such as first aid, critical incident debriefing, compensation and return to work
⮚ Strategies for reducing the amount of manual handling required and manual handling risk
⮚ Supporting people with behaviours of concern.
Preventing injury and using assistive aids
Because of the many dangers associated with manual handling and the many injuries and accidents that occur as a result of poor handling techniques, there is a variety of equipment available for workers who must engage in these activities. The purpose of this equipment is to provide workers with better techniques and options when moving things, so that all of the strain and effort is not borne by the person.
This equipment, in the care industry, can include:
⮚ Client hoists
⮚ Slide sheets
⮚ Standing lifters
⮚ Riser/recliner beds
⮚ Bath hoists
⮚ Slings
⮚ Transfer boards
⮚ Turntables
⮚ Wheelchairs
⮚ Lifting cushions
⮚ Other manual handling assistive devices.
Where equipment is provided and available, you should always endeavour to use it, rather relying on your own strength. Many organisations and establishments ban their staff from attempting to manually move people or objects and insist upon the use of assistive equipment. You may find that if you ignore instructions and warnings and attempt a procedure unaided and hurt yourself, the insurance of the company and your own personal insurance may not cover you for any injuries sustained.
Using these aids can also present hazards, such as by using it wrong or using the wrong equipment; your organisation should train you in how to use any equipment before you use it. Using equipment, you are not trained or authorised to use can result in disciplinary action, as it is against health and safety.
If everyone applied themselves to keeping an eye out for potential hazards, such as:
⮚ Loose carpets
⮚ Wet floors
⮚ Faulty equipment.
And then took the relevant action, such as:
⮚ Cordoning off the area
⮚ Fixing something
⮚ Arranging repairs or replacements
⮚ Warning and informing other staff and service users.
Then many accidents and incidents could be avoided altogether; if one employee chooses to ignore a loose carpet in the hallway, the next colleague could trip and fall, which could hurt them, hurt others and potentially cause a serious injury, especially if the incident happened close to a door frame or stairway.
Failing to implement organisational procedures can result in disciplinary action being taken against you, as well as it being ethically wrong to ignore problems. Accidents and injuries are bad for organisations financially, ethically and operationally, regarding staff compensation, absence and insurance breaches, so it is in the organisation’s best interests to implement and monitor these procedures.
Risk assessment tools
Risk assessment tools are usually:
⮚ Charts
⮚ Checklists
⮚ Scales of danger
⮚ Questionnaires
⮚ And similar.
They ask predetermined questions regarding the danger of the activity; these forms can be universal or can apply to specific types of task.
These forms are available from government websites or may be designed by your organisation to offer a more specific and relevant check for activities carried out regularly in your workplace.
Rating scales give the task a value that determines the level of risk or danger to staff. The idea behind these tools is that you know what level of danger to expect and should try to reduce the danger, where possible.
Activity 3C
3.5 – Conduct all activities in accordance with legal, organisation and duty of care requirements
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Follow legal requirements for providing care to clients
⮚ Carry out work activities while maintaining a duty of care
⮚ Use organisational policies and procedures to provide care to clients.
Legal and organisational requirements
There is a range of legislation that you may need to uphold when conducting work-related activities. Legal requirements will be embedded into organisational policies and procedures; however, it is important to be aware of legislation in place that could have an impact on your role.
Legislation could include:
⮚ Aboriginals Councils and Associations Act 1976
⮚ Age Discrimination Act 2003
⮚ Anti-discrimination Act 1991
⮚ Children, Youth and Families Act 2005
⮚ Child Care Act 2002
⮚ Child Protection Act 1999
⮚ Disability Services Act 1986
⮚ Disability Discrimination Act 1992
⮚ Domestic and Family Violence Protection Act 1989
⮚ Education Act 1989
⮚ Family Assistance Laws 2006
⮚ Freedom of Information Act 1992
⮚ Health Practitioner Registration Boards (Administration) Act 1999
⮚ Health Practitioners (Professional Standards) Act 1999
⮚ Mental Health Act 1974
⮚ Nursing Act 1992
⮚ Occupational Therapists Registration Act 2001
⮚ Physiotherapists Registration Act 2001
⮚ Powers of Attorney Act 1998
⮚ Privacy Act 1988
⮚ Psychologists Registration Act 2001
⮚ Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
⮚ Racial Discrimination Act 1975
⮚ Sex Discrimination Act 1984
⮚ Social Security Act 1991.
There is not scope to go into all of these in more detail and is left to you to decide which are the most relevant to you and take the time to gain more information about the various acts that could apply. The anti-discrimination Acts are outlined below.
Anti-discrimination Acts
Although you need to take individual differences into account when treating a client, you also need to ensure that you do not treat them differently because of their age, race, sex or disability.
For example, if you are treating a client who is older and cannot hear properly, you should not ignore them or attempt to gain consent without asking, etc. You will need to act to ensure that the client fully understands the treatment just as you would do for any other client.
The Australian Human Rights Commission Act 1986 was previously known as the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act 1986 and was renamed in 2008. The Commission is funded by the Australian Government and is in place to handle and investigate complaints of discrimination.
The types of discrimination that are handled by the Commission include:
⮚ Age
⮚ Disability
⮚ Race
⮚ Sex
⮚ Sexual harassment
⮚ Gender identity.
More information can be found here http://www.comlaw.gov.au/Details/C2014C00684
Age Discrimination Act 2004
The Age Discrimination Act is in place to ensure that individuals are not advantaged or disadvantaged because of their age; this is particularly relevant to recruitment, employment and education.
This act protects individuals from being discriminated against on the grounds of their age and is in place to promote equality in all applicable areas; there are very few instances that are exempt from this law.
The objectives of the Age Discrimination Act 2004, as written in the Act, provide an overview of this.
“The objects of this Act are:
⮚ To eliminate, as far as possible, discrimination against persons on the grounds of age in the areas of work, education, access to premises, the provisions of goods, services and facilities, accommodation, the disposal of land, the administration of Commonwealth laws and programs and requests for information
⮚ To ensure, as far as practicable, that everyone has the same rights to equality before the law, regardless of age, as the rest of the community
⮚ To allow appropriate benefits and other assistance to be given to people of a certain age, particularly younger and older persons, in recognition of their particular circumstances
⮚ To promote recognition and acceptance within the community of the principle that people of all ages have the same fundamental rights
⮚ To respond to demographic change by removing barriers to older people participating in society, particularly the workforce, and changing negative stereotypes about older people; bearing in
mind the international commitment to eliminate age discrimination reflected in the Political Declaration adopted in Madrid, Spain on 12 April 2002 by the Second World Assembly on Ageing.”
Source, ‘Age Discrimination Act 2004’ at the Federal Register of Legislation: https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2018C00022
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
The purpose of the Disability Discrimination Act is to protect disabled individuals and groups from discrimination based upon the disabled status; this law is particularly applicable to instances such as employment, education and recruitment.
The Disability Discrimination Act also protects the rights of disabled persons to access goods and services; this may include accessing retail outlets and professional individuals, such as lawyers.
More information on the Disability Discrimination Act 2004 can be found here http://www.comlaw.gov.au/Series/C2004A04426
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
The Racial Discrimination Act 1975 protects individuals from being discriminated against based upon their race and seeks to promote equality.
Under this Act, it is illegal to discriminate against anyone based on their race, colour or ethnic origin. The Act also means that racial vilification is against the law.
As with the age and disability Acts, the Age Discrimination Act 2004 and the Disability Discrimination Act 1992, respectively, affected groups and individuals must have equal access to:
⮚ Access:
o to public areas
o to retain premises
o to goods and services, e.g. healthcare
⮚ Accommodation
nions and professional bodies regarding your job role and appropriate responsibilities.
Duty of care
Duty of care is written legally into work health and safety legislation – it is a moral duty to anticipate possible hazards and causes of injury and do everything reasonably practicable to prevent/remove/minimise these causes.
This means that duty of care cannot be delegated – all adults in the workplace are responsible for health and safety.
Courts will determine breaches of duty of care based on the following criteria:
⮚ What is typically expected of another person in the same situation
⮚ The person's roles and responsibilities within their organisation
⮚ The experience/level of training for the individual
⮚ The practicalities of the situation
⮚ What is deemed acceptable practice within the community
⮚ Generally acceptable standards in the situation
⮚ Relevant laws, e.g. the Workplace Health and Safety Act 2011.

Questions:
1. Name five potential risks to the client. For two of these risks, say who you would refer these to and why.
*
2. Name four potential risks to the caregiver.
*
3. From your own thinking, identify five work practices you should apply to help minimise the potential harm to clients, self, and others.
*
4. From your own thinking, identify five work practices you should apply to help minimise the potential harm to clients, self, and others.
