Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
4. Support clients making a complaint
4.1 Discuss organisation and legal complaints mechanism and ensure client is aware of rights and responsibilities
4.2 Assist client in lodging a complaint
4.3 Monitor process and provide ongoing support and information to client
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills)
that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be demonstrated evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Worked in collaboration with 1 client to identify their interests, needs and rights
⮚ Advocated on behalf of 1 client to achieve a specific outcome
⮚ Supported 1 client throughout an organisational or legal complaints process.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage the task and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Universal Declaration of Human Rights
⮚ Relationship between human needs and human rights
⮚ Human rights frameworks, approaches, instruments
⮚ Legal and ethical considerations (international, national, state/territory, local) related to facilitation of client rights and interests and how these impact individual workers:
o duty of care
o human rights
o mandatory reporting
o discrimination
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o informed consent
o organisation and legal complaints processes
o rights and responsibilities of clients, workers and organisations
⮚ Common risks to client safety and wellbeing
⮚ Relevance of child protection across all health and community services contexts, including duty of care when child is not the client, indicators of risk and adult disclosure
⮚ Actions that constitute discrimination and techniques for addressing it
⮚ Types of community resources, networks and referral options relevant to the nature of client service
⮚ Potential conflict between client needs and organisation requirements
⮚ Differences between negotiation, advocacy, mediation
⮚ Negotiation, advocacy, mediation techniques for the facilitation of client rights
⮚ Empowerment and disempowerment.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. Where simulation is used, it must reflect real working conditions by modelling industry operating conditions and contingencies, as well as, using suitable facilities, equipment and resources.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
4. Support clients making a complaint
4.1.  Discuss organisation and legal complaints mechanism and ensure client is aware of rights and responsibilities
4.2.  Assist client in lodging a complaint
4.3.  Monitor process and provide ongoing support and information to client
4.1 – Discuss organisation and legal complaints mechanism and ensure client is aware of rights and responsibilities
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Provide full information to the client on how complaints can be made on care services
⮚ Maintain respect for the client and ensure they have a full understanding of their rights and responsibilities.
Give the client the knowledge and ability to complain
You should research ways to enable clients to complain. There may be a complaints scheme in place so that clients can put in formal complaints about services.
The first process should be to lodge a complaint with the service provider before anything else – this will result in the quickest and most direct resolution to the problem. The complainant is allowed to take an advocate with them to meetings with providers as support and to ensure they are not taken advantage of.
If discussion with aged service providers is impossible or proves unproductive, the next stage is to lodge a complaint with a government complaints scheme. For example, the government has an Aged Care Complaints Scheme, which is a free service for anyone to raise concerns about the quality of care/services delivered to any aged care services subsidised by the Australian government; this includes residential care, home care, and HACC services. They can be contacted online by filling in a complaint form, by phone or in writing. For more details, visit the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission website at https://www.myagedcare.gov.au/quality-and-complaints/aged-care-complaints- commissioner.
The topics that can be complained about include:
⮚ Quality of care
⮚ Choice of activities
⮚ Catering
⮚ Personal care
⮚ Physical environment
⮚ Communication quality.
The people who can complain include:
⮚ Care recipients
⮚ Representatives of care recipients
⮚ Family members
⮚ Friends
⮚ Legal representatives
⮚ Aged care staff
⮚ Volunteers
⮚ Health professionals.
Activity 4A
4.2 – Assist client in lodging a complaint
4.3 – Monitor process and provide ongoing support and information to client
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Assist the client in following the complaints procedure, as applicable to their situation
⮚ Ensure any complaints made are taken forwards to the right individuals for resolving
⮚ Follow up on complaints, as needed, to fulfil the client’s rights and needs for care
⮚ Provide information on progress and resolution of the complaint to the client.
Assist the client in lodging a complaint
Clients are entitled to complain if they are dissatisfied with a service or any aspect of it – they must be made aware of this and the process for lodging a complaint; this should be standard practice in your organisation. Most organisations have a client grievance policy or procedure which will outline the accepted way to handle complaints and how to support the client throughout the process.
People have the right to express themselves whether that is artistically, politically or commercially. You should not prohibit the expression of opinions or not give the opportunity to do so.
The complaints process
Your organisation will have a process for complaints and how to treat them. It is important that you know what this is and your role within it.
In complaints management, it is usually a three-step process:
⮚ Talk to the people directly involved with the complaint, to attempt to solve the problem
⮚ Take the issue higher up, if initial discussions are unproductive
⮚ Take the complaint to an agency or refer the client to an advocacy service.
Depending on the nature of the complaint, there are several outcomes:
⮚ No further action is taken (but the incident documented)
⮚ The complaint is investigated
⮚ The complaint is referred to another person/department
⮚ The client takes action (after having their options explained to them).
Handling complaints
You will need tact and empathy to handle complaints from clients so that you can help to get to the root of the problem and minimise hostility.
When dealing with complaints, there are some general tips to help minimise hostility:
⮚ Establish and maintain a rapport with the client
⮚ Discuss issues in a broad sense
⮚ Be open to talking about anything the client wishes to discuss
⮚ Have an open mind
⮚ Try to get to the bottom of what caused the problem
⮚ Look for solutions
⮚ Don't directly disagree with the client
⮚ Take swift action to rectify the problems using identified solutions
⮚ Refer matters to your supervisor if you are unable to the deal with the complaint.


Questions:
1. Working alone and from your own thinking, how can you monitor the complaints process and provide support to the client during this time?
