Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
5. Review progress     5.1 Discuss progress and outcomes with the client and
collaborate on further action as necessary
5.2 Ensure follow up and links to other services as required and in accordance with client preferences
5.3 Obtain feedback and identify opportunities for improvement to own work and action as appropriate.
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills)
that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be demonstrated evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Worked in collaboration with 1 client to identify their interests, needs and rights
⮚ Advocated on behalf of 1 client to achieve a specific outcome
⮚ Supported 1 client throughout an organisational or legal complaints process.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage the task and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Universal Declaration of Human Rights
⮚ Relationship between human needs and human rights
⮚ Human rights frameworks, approaches, instruments
⮚ Legal and ethical considerations (international, national, state/territory, local) related to facilitation of client rights and interests and how these impact individual workers:
o duty of care
o human rights
o mandatory reporting
o discrimination
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o informed consent
o organisation and legal complaints processes
o rights and responsibilities of clients, workers and organisations
⮚ Common risks to client safety and wellbeing
⮚ Relevance of child protection across all health and community services contexts, including duty of care when child is not the client, indicators of risk and adult disclosure
⮚ Actions that constitute discrimination and techniques for addressing it
⮚ Types of community resources, networks and referral options relevant to the nature of client service
⮚ Potential conflict between client needs and organisation requirements
⮚ Differences between negotiation, advocacy, mediation
⮚ Negotiation, advocacy, mediation techniques for the facilitation of client rights
⮚ Empowerment and disempowerment.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. Where simulation is used, it must reflect real working conditions by modelling industry operating conditions and contingencies, as well as, using suitable facilities, equipment and resources.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
5. Review progress
5.1.  Discuss progress and outcomes with the client and collaborate on further action as necessary
5.2.  Ensure follow up and links to other services as required and in accordance with client preferences
5.3.  Obtain feedback and identify opportunities for improvement to own work and action as appropriate
5.1 – Discuss progress and outcomes with the client and collaborate on further action as necessary
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Use appropriate listening and communication skills to discuss progress and outcomes with the client
⮚ Work together with the client to decide on further needs and actions.
Discussing progress and outcomes
Throughout the complaints process, you will need to discuss its progress and any outcomes with the client, before deciding what action to take. There are many potential outcomes of a complaint which may include more than one solution.
Outcomes could include:
⮚ An apology
⮚ Compensation
⮚ Prosecution
⮚ Systematic remedies:
o action plan for lessons learned/improvement
o changes to policy
o staff training.
Collaborating with a client
To collaborate with the client, you will need to be prepared to listen attentively so that you fully understand what it is the client is trying to say and help the client with any further action that may be necessary.
Active listening
Active listening is a form of communicating that requires the listener to relate what they hear to the speaker, by way of restating or paraphrasing what they have heard in their own words. This helps both parties clarify and confirm what is being communicated.
Feedback shows understanding and involves both verbal and non-verbal communication. Often, workers/clients can find it difficult to express their feelings in words, and non-verbal cues can express a
client's feelings more effectively. When you communicate through active listening, it shows respect for the client/service provider and validates their worth. This enhances their self-esteem which, in turn, enables them to relax and means they are less likely to put up defensive barriers.
OARS skills (open-ended questions, affirmations, reflections, summaries) are one example of empathic listening skills because they are all about listening in a heartfelt manner without trying to change or push the individual. These OARS skills come from a therapy called Motivational Interviewing, developed by Professor William R Miller.
If the client is unhappy with the outcome, they may decide to appeal or pursue further until a satisfactory solution is given. For example, if a client is offered financial compensation for an injury sustained while using a service, they may not be satisfied with the sum offered, or they may want more long term strategic measures put in place so that it doesn’t happen again.
Activity 5A
5.2 – Ensure follow up and links to other services as required and in accordance with client preferences
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Provide information on follow-ups, links, and other services, and access these for the client
⮚ Make sure that services and follow-ups are acquired for the client.
Following up
After the complaint has been resolved, you may need to follow up with the client. It is very important that you ensure the client is satisfied with the outcome of the complaint.
The client may want to have the final say on the matter or may need additional support or assistance with something. You may need to give clients further information or links to other services so that they can fully resolve the issue.
Information may include:
⮚ Financial information – when compensation will be given
⮚ What to do if they have any other complaints or are faced with a similar situation again
⮚ Contact numbers for future reference
⮚ Website information
⮚ Links to other services – for example:
o therapists/counsellors
o community groups
o occupational therapists
o lawyers/solicitors.
The client may ask for a specific service to be provided or further information regarding their rights. You may be able to send them a list of contact numbers, information leaflets, point them in the right direction, or give out addresses or website addresses. The client may also have a preference as to how they would like to receive the information, e.g. by post, email, or over the phone.
Activity 5B
5.3 – Obtain feedback and identify opportunities for improvement to own work and action as appropriate
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Discuss client care services received with the client
⮚ Listen to feedback that is given by the client on the care services they have received
⮚ Assess how the client’s care services have worked and whether further opportunities can be taken up or if improvements can be made.
Client feedback
You should aim to collect client feedback regularly to assess whether you are providing a satisfactory service. Feedback may be positive and negative and can help you improve in the areas you are weakest.
There are a range of tools to help you gain feedback, including:
⮚ Surveys
⮚ Suggestion boxes
⮚ Space for comments on website
⮚ Face-to-face communication/interviews.
The tools above can be standardised so that the same types of questions can be asked of all clients or tailored to individuals. It is a good idea to have a mixture of methods – for example, both informal communication (e.g. a chat) and formal (e.g. survey) – so that clients feel they have the opportunity to be heard. All forms of communication should be documented according to organisational guidelines so that they can be referred to.
You may need to record or analyse feedback to ensure that any problems are resolved and improvements implemented. To record feedback may involve listening to a client and either filling in a form manually or via a computer. In some cases, the feedback will have been written by a client, so you may not need to record, just analyse it.
To analyse the feedback, you should assign a coding system to the answers. For example, if you have gained feedback through a questionnaire, you could input the questions into heading cells in a spreadsheet to segregate them. Then, using the code (e.g. a scale: 1 is strongly disagree, two is disagree, 3 is unsure/don’t know, 4 is agree, and 5 is strongly agree), you could group the answers. The information can be put into a graph or chart to show a general correlation.
Reviewing client services
You will need to review your client services regularly so that you can offer the best service to clients. You may have organisational or best practice guidelines in place that would be helpful when measuring your standard of service.
Best practice may include the following principles:
⮚ Respecting individual differences
⮚ Respect for cultures and indigenous heritage
⮚ Quality of work environment
⮚ Integrity
⮚ Empowerment
⮚ Fairness and impartiality
⮚ Privacy and confidentiality
⮚ Social responsibility.
You may need to think how you compare to the above best practice ideals and think of areas that you could improve.
What is reflective practice?
Keeping up-to-date with the knowledge required to perform your daily activities at work to the highest standards is important in the care field. Reflective practice is also crucial for developing skills in the care field. Reflective practice helps you to understand your strengths and weaknesses as a worker in a care/health related environment. Within this, it is important to act on your findings – if you find you have a weakness in a skill required for activities you perform on a daily basis you need to find ways to improve your skills.
The Johns model identifies particular areas of reflective practice:
⮚ Describing an experience significant to the learner
⮚ Identifying personal issues arising from the experience
⮚ Pinpointing personal intentions
⮚ Empathising with others in the experience
⮚ Recognising one’s own values and beliefs
⮚ Linking this experience with previous experiences
⮚ Creating new options for future behaviour
⮚ Looking at ways to improve working with patients, families, and staff to meet patients’ needs.

Questions:
1. Why might a client need you to follow up and give information on other services?
*
2. What type of information/links to services might you need to provide?
*
3. What different ways could you communicate this information?