Unit of Competency
Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to respond to the goals and aspirations of older people and provide support services in a manner that focuses on improving health outcomes and quality of life, using a person-centered approach.
This unit applies to support workers in residential or community contexts.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
1.Develop relationships with older people
1.1 Conduct interpersonal exchanges in a manner that promotes empowerment and develops and maintains trust and goodwill
1.2 Recognise and respect older people’s social, cultural and spiritual differences
1.3 Maintain confidentiality and privacy of the person within organisation policy and protocols
1.4 Work with the person to identify physical and social enablers and disablers impacting on health outcomes and quality of life1.5 Encourage the person to adopt a shared responsibility for own support as a means of achieving better health outcomes and quality of lif
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
●  Responded to the goals and aspirations of at least 2 older people, 1 in a simulated environment and 1 in the workplace:
o employing flexible, adaptable and person-centered approaches to empower the individual
o recognising and responding appropriately to situations of risk or potential risk
● Used oral communication skills to maintain positive and respectful relationships.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
● Structure and profile of the aged care sector:
o residential aged care sector
o home and community support sector
o current best practice service delivery models
o relevant agencies and referral networks for support services
●  Key issues facing older people, including:
o stereotypical attitudes and myths
o the impact of social devaluation on an individual’s quality of life
● Implications for work in the sector, including:
o concepts of positive, active and healthy ageing
o rights-based approaches
o person-centered practice
o consumer directed care
o palliative approach
o empowerment and disempowerment
o reablement and effective reablement strategies
● The ageing process and related physiological and psychological changes, including sexuality and gender issues
● Strategies that the older person may adopt to promote healthy lifestyle practices
● Legal and ethical considerations for working with older people, including:
o codes of practice
o discrimination
o dignity of risk
o duty of care
o human rights
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations work health and safety
●  Indicators of abuse and/or neglect, including:
o physical
o sexual
o psychological
o financial
● Reporting requirements for suspected abuse situations
● The impact of one's own attitudes on working with older people.
Assessment Conditions
All aspects of the performance evidence must have been demonstrated using simulation prior to being demonstrated in the workplace. The following conditions must be met for this unit:
●  Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
o relevant organisation policies and procedures
o relevant aids to assist with independent living.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3- bd22cc4f1e53
1. Develop relationships with older people
1.1.  Conduct interpersonal exchanges in a manner that promotes empowerment and develops and maintains trust and goodwill
1.2.  Recognise and respect older people’s social, cultural and spiritual differences
1.3.  Maintain confidentiality and privacy of the person within organisation policy and protocols
1.4.  Work with the person to identify physical and social enablers and disablers impacting on health outcomes and quality of life
1.5.  Encourage the person to adopt a shared responsibility for own support as a means of achieving better health outcomes and quality of life
1.1 – Conduct interpersonal exchanges in a manner that promotes empowerment and develops and maintains trust and goodwill
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Establish rapport with clients
●  Incorporate empowering phrases into their speech
●  Use active listening techniques to better engage with clients.
Interpersonal exchanges
Interpersonal skills involve communicating effectively with different people. If you have good interpersonal skills, you will usually be able to talk with ease to a variety of people with differing backgrounds and at a wide range of levels. Your communication will be confident, eloquent and adaptable to suit different situations.
To establish rapport:
● Try and find something you have in common
● Use positive, confident and co-operative language
● Be interested in what people are saying and ask questions to demonstrate this
● Interpret non-verbal and verbal messages and react accordingly or mirror their body language
● Your use of language, verbal or non-verbal – try to be accommodating and adapt your style
● Be aware of cultural differences:
○  different cultures and communities have different euphemisms and accents, which you should bear in mind when speaking.
Empathic/active listening is a form of communication that requires the listener to relate what they hear to the speaker, by way of restating or paraphrasing what they have heard in their own words. This helps both the counsellor and client clarify and confirm what is being communicated.
This relation shows understanding and involves both verbal and non-verbal communication. Often, clients can find it difficult to express their feelings in words and non-verbal cues can express a client's feelings more effectively.
Non-verbal cues can include:
● Pauses
● Gestures
● Bargaining
●  Eye contact
●  Length of response
●  Pitch and tone of voice.
When you communicate through active listening, it shows respect for the client/service provider and validates their worth. This enhances their self-esteem which, in turn, enables them to relax and means they are less likely to put up defensive barriers.
OARS skills (open-ended questions, affirmations, reflections, summaries) are one example of empathic listening skills because they are all about listening in a heartfelt manner without trying to change or push the individual. These OARS skills come from a therapy called Motivational Interviewing, developed by Professor William R Miller.
Empowering phrases could include:
● ‘It sounds like…’
●  ‘You seem to be…’
●  ‘As I understand…’
Negative/disempowering phrases:
●  Attempting to rescue client from problems
● Too many questions (can act as a barrier to conversation)
●  Commands such as ‘stop worrying’, ‘don’t be so upset’ etc.
●  Threatening comments
●  Changing the subject.
Positive ageing
Positive ageing is about being proactive and facing the challenges of
growing old. Rather than looking at the downsides of growing old, you look at the opportunities and make the best of them.
Personal attitude
It is important to maintain a personal attitude that promotes the empowerment of older people. A personal attitude that is ageist can have a hugely negative impact on the client.
For example, if you hold the view that ‘you can’t teach an old dog new tricks’, then an elderly person who may be very capable of engaging in a reablement process and gaining greater responsibility and independence, may find that they are not given such an opportunity.
A poor attitude towards the elderly can deprive them of opportunities and decrease their sense of self-esteem and self-worth.
As a care provider, therefore, it is your responsibility to develop an attitude that works to promote the independence and wellbeing of all clients in your care, and to support them towards independence and dignity.
Activity 1A
1.2 – Recognise and respect older people’s social, cultural and spiritual differences
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Handle cross-cultural issues with sensitivity and professionalism
●  Act in a manner that does not discriminate on the basis of a person’s cultural, social or spiritual differences
● Comply with their legal obligations in relation to anti-discrimination law.
Social, cultural and spiritual differences
When working with any client, you will have to consider their personal preferences, religious background and cultural upbringing. All play an important part in client care and how they may choose to live their life. You may find that you have been asked to advocate on behalf of a client because a counsellor wants to talk to your client about personal issues, which culturally, they would not normally discuss.
You may come across a number of cross-cultural issues, all of which should be handled with great sensitivity, care and respect
Discrimination is unacceptable in the workplace, and this includes within the realm of aged care. As a carer, you should provide equal services to older people, regardless of their race, cultural background, spiritual beliefs or sexual preferences.
Legal obligations
Under equal opportunity and anti-discrimination laws, service providers must comply with their obligations and avoid both direct and indirect discrimination.
Aged care providers are not lawfully allowed to refuse custom to clients who require culturally adapted services – this includes those who speak a different language, as well as religious or spiritual preferences. If your provider receives a complaint to the Equal Opportunity Commission, it can cost them up to $25,000 in costs before the case even goes to court.
Therefore, it is vital to be proactive with the strategies you employ to make sure you comply with legislation – this includes educating your staff and creating clear policies and procedures for cultural awareness. As well as the service provider being liable for the discrimination, the service provider who employs them is also responsible.
The following areas are illegal to discriminate against someone on the basis of: Disability
Age Sexuality Gender Pregnancy Marital status
Physical features Race
Religious belief Nationality Political beliefs Industrial beliefs.
'Living Longer Living Better'
This is an aged care reform package announced on April 20 2012 – it is a ten-year plan that aims to make aged care fairer, more effective and more nationally consistent. It aims to provide older people with greater choice, control and easier access to aged care services.
It means that more priority and support for home care, better access to residential care, greater support to dementia sufferers and also a push at strengthening the aged care workforce. This is nationwide and doesn't discriminate against anyone, regardless of their race, cultural, spiritual or sexual preferences.
The full details of the plan can be found on the website of the Department of Health and Ageing.
Activity 1B
1.3 – Maintain confidentiality and privacy of the person within organisation policy and protocols
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Comply with the Privacy Act 1988
●  Take steps to ensure client privacy, e.g. knocking before entering a room, asking permission before performing certain tasks, etc.
● Determine when it is necessary and appropriate to share information with colleagues.
Ensuring information is kept confidential
Confidentiality is required by law in certain respects; the privacy of client records is a highly important aspect of confidentiality. Failure to maintain privacy of client records is punishable by law and organisations can be sued by the client.
The Privacy Act 1988 comprises of 13 Privacy Principles that legally must be adhered to and also, as explained by the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) website:
● “Regulates the collection, storage, use, disclosure, security and disposal of individuals' tax file numbers
●  Permits the handling of health information for health and medical research purposes in certain circumstances, where researchers are unable to seek individuals' consent
●  Allows the information commissioner to approve and register enforceable app codes that have been developed by an app code developer, or developed by the information commissioner directly
●  Permits a small business operator, who would otherwise not be subject to the Australian privacy principles (apps) and any relevant privacy code, to opt-in to being covered by the apps and any relevant app code
●  Allows for privacy regulations to be made.”
Source: http://www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/privacy-act/the-privacy-act (Accessed 01.08.19)
Ensuring client privacy
Providing clients with as much privacy as possible will have a significant impact on their happiness and self-worth, and make life much more agreeable and attractive; having the privacy and opportunity to do things also encourages and provides levels of independence that clients may not necessarily expect.
Tips for ensuring privacy:
●  Knocking before you enter a room and awaiting an invitation inside will show clients that they have much more autonomy and respect than having them walked in on with no warning
●  Closing doors or curtains, while treatment is in progress, can maintain privacy and dignity. Signs that treatment is in progress can sometimes be used effectively
● A care worker asking permission before touching clients when treatment commences,
e.g. ‘okay so we are all ready now, I just need to apply slight pressure on your back – is that alright?’
●  Providing clients with a private room where they can take or make phone calls or discuss personal issues.
The following guidelines serve as a good basis for maintaining client confidentiality:
● Never discuss client information in social circles
● Documented information should only ever relate to service delivery and related factors
●  Confidential documents must be stored securely, out of reach of the public and unauthorised personnel
●  Client information should never be disclosed to external agencies that are not part of the client's service delivery system
●  Names and details of clients should not be disclosed in public forums,
e.g. meetings, seminars, etc.
There are cases where confidentiality can be broken:
●  If the person is at serious risk of harm
● Where there is an imminent, serious threat to the public or a specific person
● Where there is a police request for information under the Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
● For use by healthcare professionals (as long as a recognised standard of treatment is being delivered).
Issues of confidentiality should never be taken lightly – you should discuss them with your supervisor. Senior staff should always be involved for complex, competing decisions, e.g. confidentiality vs safety.
Sharing information within a team
Even if the client asks that you not share their information with others on your team, it is necessary to do this to ensure service quality is coordinated and of the highest quality. You should inform them of this, explaining that all of the team need to have access to appropriate information to ensure the best outcomes for them. Reassure them that their confidentiality will be maintained outside of a professional context.
The only situation where it may be appropriate to withhold client information from colleagues is when there is a conflict of interest. However, if information isn't shared, it makes team-based care reviews impossible and appropriate decisions are harder to make.
Activity 1C
1.4 - Work with the person to identify physical and social enablers and disablers impacting on health outcomes and quality of life
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Identify factors that act as enablers in a client’s life
●  Identify factors that act as disablers in a client’s life.
Enablers and disablers
Enablers are those factors that encourage elderly people to do something – for example, attend a class. Disablers are those factors that discourage elderly people from doing something. Every individual will be different, so it is important to work with them to identify the enablers and disablers impacting on their choices. Some common disablers and enablers can be found below.
Disablers:
● Health problems
●  Fear of falling
● Inconvenience
● Transport issues
● Lack of friends or support
● Self-esteem
● Tiredness.
Enablers:
● The expectation of positive outcomes, for example:
○ social benefits
○  health benefits
● Social support, e.g. if attending as part of friendship group
● Easily accessed, for example:
○ if individual drives
○  if there is a bus service
○  if it is not far away
○  if wheelchair access/lifts, etc.
Helping clients to identify what is preventing them from taking part in certain things can lead to a better understanding of how you can help them, and also identify solutions to overcome disablement. Think about what it is that would enable this particular client to attend a class, go shopping, etc. Being able and feeling comfortable doing things helps clients achieve a better quality of life through independence.
Key issues facing older people
There are many issues facing older people that can have an impact on their care.
Some of these key issues are found below, along with a possible solution:
● Stereotypes and ageist attitudes – education on elderly people
● Financial hardship – grant and community schemes
● Grief – counselling
● Living too remotely to receive services – residential care
● Physical and psychological disabilities – home adaptations and medical assistance.
Activity 1D
1.5 – Encourage the person to adopt a shared responsibility for own support as a means of achieving better health outcomes and quality of life
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Discuss the responsibilities of all parties involved in the care of a client
●  Assess and agree upon responsibilities that the client is able to take upon themselves.
Shared responsibility
You will need to discuss responsibilities of all parties involved with the client’s care.
These may include:
● The client
● The client’s family, which may include contacting separately:
○ client’s partner
○ siblings
○ children
○  other relatives or friends
●  Service providers:
○ other careers
○ cleaners
○ maintenance people, e.g. for changing light bulbs, gardening, etc.
This is so that you can establish who will do what and when, what is acceptable and what is not, for all parties concerned. Your client will also need to know what your role or service covers/doesn’t cover. It is important to remember that these may well change over time as your client’s needs change. You should plan to review these changes on a regular basis.
Client’s responsibilities
Client’s responsibilities will be unique to each client. You will need to agree what it is that they are willing and able to do for themselves.
For example:
●  A client may want some help getting their socks on, but are able to manage their shoes themselves
●  You may be asked to prepare dinner for a client, but the client may want to wash up afterwards
●  The client needs help with transport to and from places, but makes and keeps appointments, such as doctors, dentists, vets, etc. themselves
●  A client may be able to vacuum and dust, but needs help with cleaning the oven and mopping.

questions:
1. How can you promote empowerment, trust and goodwill. Ensure you take steps to establish rapport and avoid negative or disempowering communication. 
*
2. Give eight areas that are illegal to discriminate against in regards to older people.
*
3. What does the Equal Opportunity Act say about aged care providers and people’s social, cultural and spiritual differences? (Maximum 100 words)
*
4. What is the ‘Living Longer Living Better’ aged care reform package? (Maximum 100 words)
*
5. Refer to Case Study A - Privacy and Confidentiality. Read the APP Guidelines and the scenario between Eddie and Beatrice, then answer the following question.

Identify two guidelines that Eddie did not follow. What did he do wrong?
*
6. Name three guidelines you can use as a good basis for maintaining client confidentiality.
*
7. Give four instances where you could breach confidentiality.
