The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
2.  Provide services to older people
2.1 Identify and discuss services which empower the older person
2.2 Support the older person to express their own identity and preferences without imposing own values and attitudes
2.3 Adjust services to meet the specific needs of the older person and provide services according to the older person’s preferences
2.4 Provide services according to organisation policies, procedures and duty of care requirements
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
●  Responded to the goals and aspirations of at least 2 older people, 1 in a simulated environment and 1 in the workplace:
o employing flexible, adaptable and person-centred approaches to empower the individual
o recognising and responding appropriately to situations of risk or potential risk
● Used oral communication skills to maintain positive and respectful relationships.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
● Structure and profile of the aged care sector:
o residential aged care sector
o home and community support sector
o current best practice service delivery models
o relevant agencies and referral networks for support services
o Key issues facing older people, including:
o stereotypical attitudes and myths
o the impact of social devaluation on an individual’s quality of life
● Implications for work in the sector, including:
o concepts of positive, active and healthy ageing
o rights-based approaches
o person-centred practice
o consumer directed care
o palliative approach
o empowerment and disempowerment
o reablement and effective reablement strategies
● The ageing process and related physiological and psychological changes, including sexuality and gender issues
● Strategies that the older person may adopt to promote healthy lifestyle practices
● Legal and ethical considerations for working with older people, including:
o codes of practice
o discrimination
o dignity of risk
o duty of care
o human rights
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations
o work health and safety
● Indicators of abuse and/or neglect, including:
o physical
o sexual
o psychological
o financial
● Reporting requirements for suspected abuse situations
● The impact of one's own attitudes on working with older people.
Assessment Conditions
All aspects of the performance evidence must have been demonstrated using simulation prior to being demonstrated in the workplace. The following conditions must be met for this unit:
●  Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
o relevant organisation policies and procedures
o relevant aids to assist with independent living.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3- bd22cc4f1e53
2. Provide services to older people
2.1.  Identify and discuss services which empower the older person
2.2.  Support the older person to express their own identity and preferences without imposing own values and attitudes
2.3.  Adjust services to meet the specific needs of the older person and provide services according to the older person’s preferences
2.4.  Provide services according to organisation policies, procedures and duty of care requirements
2.1 – Identify and discuss services which empower the older person
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Identify services which will empower the client by taking into account the specific needs of the client.
Identify and discuss services
One of the main fears of ageing is the loss of independence and having involvement in decisions. Therefore, you should do everything in your power to empower the older person regarding their service requirements, so that they can remain active members of their community.
Empowerment includes anything that will enable older people to do things. Such examples are:
●  Assistive equipment (wheelchairs, Zimmer frames, etc.)
●  Taking them shopping – independence to live at home
●  Taking them places – provides self-esteem and social involvement
●  Treating them with respect and as adults
●  Domestic personal assistance (home help)
●  Financial planning assistance
●  Home modifications (shower and toilet adaptations, stair lifts, etc.)
●  Financial aid (so they can afford bills and maintain a quality of life).
The overall aim is to ensure that they can continue to carry out the lifestyle in surroundings they are used to and feel comfortable with.
Activity 2A
2.2 – Support the older person to express their own identity and preferences without imposing own values and attitudes
2.3 – Adjust services to meet the specific needs of the older person and provide services according to the older person’s preferences
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
● Gather information that helps to identify a client’s preferences using an appropriate method
● Take steps to support a client’s preferences and ensure they are carried out. This may involve:
○ keeping record of the client’s preferences, requests and stipulations
○  continually consulting with the client to provide them with the opportunity to express their preferences
●  Make adjustments to services according to the specific needs and preferences of the client.
Identifying preferences
While there are a lot of aspects of aged care that will bear similarities to one another, you must also learn to treat each aged person as an individual. Therefore, you should conduct a full background assessment of the elder you are working with, so that you understand all of their needs. This should be combined with the ACAT assessment – another simple yet effective technique is to get to know the client's you work with. If possible, try to ensure that care workers work with the same people for an extended period of time, whether in residential or home care. This is because familiarity will instil confidence and make for a more personalised service.
● Information regarding preferences may be gathered in a number of ways:
● An informal chat with the client.
● Friends and family
●  Observation, e.g. you could notice photographs of them in their garden and ask them if they like to garden (you could then ask if they would like to come with you to the garden centre to pick some plants out for the garden at the centre/home)
● A more formal written document, e.g. a questionnaire.
Supporting client preferences
Clients have the right to assert their preferences about any aspect of their care, whether they are in residential or private accommodation. Clients should be given the opportunity to make decisions and voice their preferences wherever possible.
●  When clients have preferences that are applicable to a situation, they should be confirmed with both the client and the supervisor, where required
●  Client preferences, requests and stipulations should be recorded in their notes; this ensures that their preferences are not overlooked, misunderstood or miscommunicated; for example, if a client states that they would like to be woken early in the morning so that they can listen to a radio show or watch a television show, this message may not reach the person on duty in the morning if it is only mentioned verbally, or the caregiver forgets to pass on the message
●  Other preferences, such as that a client does not like to be called by their first name, should be recorded so that anyone who works with the client is informed of this
●  Clients should be consulted as much as possible on aspects of their care and lifestyle; this empowers them and allows them to live more comfortably and happily
●  Over time, it is good practice to confirm that clients’ preferences are still accurate by asking them whether they are still satisfied with all aspects of their care. If they express a desire for a change, aim to rectify this ASAP
●  Unless clients inform you of changes directly, their preferences may have changed without you knowing – you should consult family members and advocates periodically to check if they are aware of any such desires for change.
Having their particular preferences recorded and accessible allows you to provide a more friendly and personalised service, even if the care worker has never worked with a particular client before. By consulting notes, other care staff are able to see that the client prefers certain things, such as not being called by a nickname, not being touched on their shoulders and that they have difficulty taking tablets. This means that different carers can avoid making mistakes and portraying the service as impersonal by having to ask many questions.
Adjusting services
You have a responsibility to ensure a safe environment for the client. You may want to try and empower the client and have them make decisions for themselves and help to give them some independence. However, you must be careful not to be negligent of the risks involved in increased independence. For example, if a client enjoys gardening and there is a garden centre nearby, but the client is suffering from dementia, it would not be appropriate for you to suggest the client goes to the garden center by themselves as you would be neglecting your duty of care.
Careers should think about any risks that would be increased through the client partaking in an activity or anything that could prevent the client from obtaining that service.
You may need to adjust:
● Times
● Equipment
● The type of service
● Location.
For example, if your client wanted to attend an exercise class, and they had brittle bones or osteoporosis, there may be a risk of falling. How could you overcome this risk? One option could be to water aerobics; another could be for the career to attend the class with the client. You will need to weigh up the options with the client and come to a decision on the best way forward.
Activity 2B
2.4 – Provide services according to organisation policies, procedures and duty of care requirements
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Carry out work that is in accordance with their job role and personal responsibilities
●  Uphold their duty of care requirements, including anticipating hazards and taking reasonable care to maintain the client’s safety and wellbeing
● Act in compliance with organisation policies and procedures, and with duty of care legislation.
Following policy and procedures
A key element of working within policies, protocols and procedures is to only perform duties that fall within your job role – you should never attempt to carry out or provide professional advice on something that you are not qualified to. You should also know what to do when you are unsure of your job role and work instructions.
Knowing your job role and responsibilities
In order to ensure that you know you specific job role and responsibilities, you can practice the following:
● Seek regular support and supervision from your supervisor and team leader, using structured sessions
● Seek advice from colleagues during staff meetings and through consultation
● Check professional guidelines when you are unsure
● Clarify your position description clarified and/or have it refer to professional standards/legislation
● Perform a competency assessment
● Document all major work activities
● Consult with unions and professional bodies regarding your job role and appropriate responsibilities.
Duty of care
Duty of care is written legally into the Workplace Health and Safety Act 1995 – it is a moral duty to anticipate possible hazards and causes of injury and do everything reasonably practicable to prevent/remove/minimise these causes.
This means that duty of care cannot be delegated – all adults in the workplace are responsible for health and safety.
Courts will determine breaches of duty of care based on the following criteria:
● What is typically expected of another person in the same situation
● The person's roles and responsibilities within their organisation
● The experience/level of training for the individual
● The practicalities of the situation
● What is deemed acceptable practice within the community
● Generally acceptable standards in the situation
● Relevant laws, e.g. the Workplace Health and Safety Act 1995.
Legislation
There is a variety of legislation to consider when facilitating the empowerment of older people. Some of the legislation in place is outlined below, but you may need to do additional research to gain more understanding.
Aged Care Act 1997
The purpose of this legislation is to make sure that everyone has access to aged care if they require it, regardless of their race, gender, culture, language, geographic location or economic situation. It promotes the protection of health and well-being through high-quality care and services – these should be flexible, responsive and diverse in their nature. It also protects the consumer, legal, personal and civil rights. It covers residential, home and flexible care – the providers will receive funding according to the quality of service they supply, and it also holds them accountable for any care they provide. It also includes stipulations that aged care must be made affordable, setting out fee payment rules and charging those who can afford to contribute to their services.
Aged Care (Bond Security) Act 2006
This guarantees a financial refund if your aged care provider goes bankrupt or ceases to trade. If your provider can't pay back your bond, the Commonwealth will then refund this money to you (including interest). The only deductions will be retention amounts that apply and other agreed fees.
Then, on your behalf, the Commonwealth will chase and recover the money from the initial provider. It also covers entry contributions paid by people entering care before October 1997.
Age Discrimination Act 2004
This ensures that everyone is treated equally, regardless of their age. Older people are often discriminated against because of their age, so the Act makes it illegal to do so in areas such as employment, accommodation, information requests and goods and services provision.
The Residential Care Manual
The purpose of it is to help care providers comply with their responsibilities as per the Aged Care Act 1997, as well as helping staff understand rules and regulations. However, it only applies government-subsidised residential aged care.

questions:
1. Identify three services that you feel are relevant to an older person living at home that will empower them. Discuss your choices and would like more details on each service.    
*
2. What are the benefits of formal assessments? (Maximum 100 words
*
3. Give four other ways you could gather information about a client’s preferences.
*
4. How can you ensure that preferences are not overlooked, misunderstood or miscommunicated? (Maximum 100 words)
*
5. Give five ways you can ensure that you know your specific job role and responsibilities.
*
6. What is duty of care, and how can courts determine breaches? (Give two examples).