Unit of Competency
Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to respond to the goals and aspirations of older people and provide support services in a manner that focuses on improving health outcomes and quality of life, using a person-centred approach.
This unit applies to support workers in residential or community contexts.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
3.  Support the rights of older people
3.1 Assist the older person to understand their rights and the complaints mechanisms of the organisation
3.2 Deliver services ensuring the rights of the older person are upheld
3.3 Identify breaches of human rights and respond appropriately
3.4 Recognise signs consistent with financial, physical or emotional abuse or neglect of the older person and report to an appropriate person
3.5 Assist the person to access other support services and the complaints mechanisms as required
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
●  Responded to the goals and aspirations of at least 2 older people, 1 in a simulated environment and 1 in the workplace:
o employing flexible, adaptable and person-centred approaches to empower the individual
o recognising and responding appropriately to situations of risk or potential risk
●  Used oral communication skills to maintain positive and respectful relationships.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
●  Structure and profile of the aged care sector:
o residential aged care sector
o home and community support sector
o current best practice service delivery models
o relevant agencies and referral networks for support services
●  Key issues facing older people, including:
o stereotypical attitudes and myths
o the impact of social devaluation on an individual’s quality of life
●  Implications for work in the sector, including:
o concepts of positive, active and healthy ageing
o rights-based approaches
o person-centred practice
o consumer directed care
o palliative approach
o empowerment and disempowerment
o reablement and effective reablement strategies
●  The ageing process and related physiological and psychological changes, including sexuality and gender issues
●  Strategies that the older person may adopt to promote healthy lifestyle practices
●  Legal and ethical considerations for working with older people, including:
o codes of practice
o discrimination
o dignity of risk
o duty of care
o human rights
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations
o work health and safety
●  Indicators of abuse and/or neglect, including:
o physical
o sexual
o psychological
o financial
●  Reporting requirements for suspected abuse situations
●  The impact of one's own attitudes on working with older people.
Assessment Conditions
All aspects of the performance evidence must have been demonstrated using simulation prior to being demonstrated in the workplace. The following conditions must be met for this unit:
●  Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
o relevant organisation policies and procedures
o relevant aids to assist with independent living.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
3. Support the rights of older people
3.1.  Assist the older person to understand their rights and the complaints mechanisms of the organisation
3.2.  Deliver services ensuring the rights of the older person are upheld
3.3.  Identify breaches of human rights and respond appropriately
3.4.   Recognise signs consistent with financial, physical or emotional abuse or neglect of the older person and report to an appropriate person
3.5.  Assist the person to access other support services and the complaints mechanisms as required
3.1 – Assist the older person to understand their rights and the complaints mechanisms of the organisation
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Assist clients to lodge complaints with the service provider, where necessary
●  Assist clients to escalate complaints to the Aged Care Complaints Scheme, where necessary
●  Direct clients to advocacy services, where necessary.
Protecting the client's rights
Everyone that receives any kind of aged care has certain rights when it comes to their treatment and protection.
They are entitled to:
● Privacy
● Confidentiality
●  Access to information on themselves
● Respect and dignity
●  Have their social, physical and cultural needs met
●  Complain about improper service
● Informed choice
●  Be informed about service, policy, procedures, expectations and conditions of the service
●  Freedom of association (choosing who they want to have deliver care)
●  A right to express ideas and opinions
●  An agreed standard of care.
The clients should be made aware of these rights and be given the chance to exercise them.
Complaints
The government has an Aged Care Complaints Scheme, which is a free service for anyone to raise concerns about the quality of care/services delivered to any aged care services subsidised by the Australian government; this includes residential care, home care and HACC services.
The first process should be to lodge a complaint with the service provider before anything else – this will result in the quickest and most direct resolution to the problem. The complainant is allowed to take an advocate with them to meetings with providers as support and to ensure they are not taken advantage of. This advocacy service is free, confidential and independent – call 1800 700 600 to have Aged Care Advocacy contact an advocacy service on behalf of the complainant.
If discussion with aged service providers is impossible or proves unproductive, the next stage is to lodge a complaint with the Aged Care Complaints Scheme. They can be contacted online by filling in a complaint form or via phone on 1800 550 552.
The topics that can be complained about include:
● Quality of care
● Choice of activities
● Catering
● Personal care
● Physical environment
● Communication quality.
The people who can complain include:
● Care recipients
●  Representatives of care recipients
● Family members
● Friends
● Legal representatives
● Aged care staff
● Volunteers
● Health professionals.
Activity 3A
3.2 – Deliver services ensuring the rights of the older person are upheld
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Work in a manner that upholds the Principles for Older Persons – independence, participation, care, self-fulfilment, and dignity.
Older people's rights
In December 1991, the United Nations created a set of Principles for Older Persons – they recommended that all member governments should incorporate them into their frameworks for older people and their care.
They are based upon the following five principles:
● Independence
● Participation
● Care
● Self-fulfilment
● Dignity.
Right to: Independence
Specific details
●  To access to adequate food, water, shelter, clothing, and health care through the provision of income, family and community support and help;
●  To work and pursue other income- generating opportunities with no barriers based on age;
●  To retire and participate in determining when and at what pace withdrawal from the labour force takes place;
●  To access education and training programs to enhance literacy, facilitate employment, and permit informed planning and decision making;
●  To live in environments that are safe and adaptable to personal preferences and changing capacities;
●  To reside at home as long as possible;
Participation
●  To remain integrated and participate actively in society, including the process of development and the formulation and implementation of policies which directly affect their well-being;
●  To share their knowledge, skills, values and life experiences with younger generations;
●  To seek and develop opportunities for service to the community and to serve as volunteers in positions;
●  To form movements or associations of the elderly.
Care
●  To benefit from family support and care
consistent with the well-being of the family;
●  To access health care to help them maintain or regain the optimum level of physical, mental and emotional well- being and to prevent or delay the onset of illness;
●  To access social and legal services to enhance capacity for autonomy and provide protection and care;
●  To utilise appropriate levels of institutional care which provide protection, rehabilitation and social and mental stimulation in a humane and secure environment;
●  To exercise human rights and fundamental freedoms when residing in any shelter, care and treatment facility including full respect for their dignity, beliefs, needs and privacy and for the right to make decisions about their care and quality of life.
Self-fulfilment
●  To pursue opportunities for the full development of their potential;
●  To access the education, cultural, spiritual and recreational resources of society.
Dignity
●  To be treated fairly regardless of age, gender, racial or ethnic background, disability or other status, and to be valued independently of their economic contributions;
●  To live in dignity and security and to be free of exploitation and physical or mental abuse;
●  To exercise personal autonomy in health care decision making, including the right
to die with dignity by assenting to or rejecting treatment designed solely to prolong life.
Source: http://www.sa.agedrights.asn.au/ (Accessed 01.08.19)
All clients of aged care should be treated fairly and equally, and your work behaviour should reflect this. This means delivering all the essential services to everyone who requires them without prejudice.
Therefore, the types of conditions and situations you need to provide services for regardless are:
● Disabilities
● Different cultural backgrounds
● Different financial backgrounds

Activity 3B
3.3 – Identify breaches of human rights and respond appropriately
3.4 – Recognise signs consistent with financial, physical or emotional abuse or neglect of the older person and report to an appropriate person
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Recognise signs of abuse or other indications that the human rights of a client are being breached
●  Report abuse or other breaches of human rights to appropriate person(s)
●  Intervene appropriately when abuse is identified.
Breaches of human rights
If you are witness to a violation of the human rights of an older person, it is your duty to report this to the appropriate person(s).
The appropriate person(s) may include:
● Supervisor
●  Member of senior management
● Colleagues
● Carers
● Health professionals
●  External agencies (complaints and advocacy services and professional registering authorities)
● Law enforcement officer.
Elderly people may be abused in their own homes, in care facilities or in relatives' homes.
Defining elderly abuse
Elderly abuse is any instance where someone takes advantage of an elderly person. It can include:
●  Financial exploitation – this is the unauthorised use of an older person's money or their property by either a caregiver or an external party. The types of practices include:
○  stealing money
○  forging cheques/credit cards/accounts
○  forging the older person's signature
○  identity theft
○  requesting them to pay money to claim a 'prize'
○  charity scams
○  investment fraud
●  Physical abuse – this is the deliberate use of force on an older person, causing them pain, injury or disability. It includes violent assaults, using drugs (inappropriately), restraining them or keeping them captive
●  Emotional abuse – also known as psychological abuse, this involves treating elderly people in any way that causes them distress or emotional pain
This can include:
●  verbal abuse – threats, intimidation, yelling, humiliation, placing blame
●  non-verbal abuse – ignoring, social isolation, terrorising behaviour
●  Sexual abuse – this includes contact with an older person without their consent; this can mean physical sex acts but also includes making them watch sex acts, pornography, or forcing them to undress
●  Neglect/abandonment – this includes failure to fulfil carer duties and is responsible for over half of elderly abuse cases. It can be intentional or unintentional, based on ignorance or denial of the care requirements for the elderly person
●  Healthcare fraud – this can be committed by care providers or medical personnel; it includes:
○  charging for healthcare they don't provide
○  overcharging for services
○  taking 'kickbacks' (bonuses) for referring patients to providers of certain drugs
○ over/under-medicating
○  recommending incorrect/fraudulent remedies for medical conditions/illnesses
○  Medicare fraud.
Signs of abuse
Symptoms can be difficult to recognise as they may mirror those of dementia or frailty. It can be easy for people to explain away the signs, and many people may dismiss them as a minor issue. However, you should not believe a caregiver at face value and investigate if you are at all concerned. The following are things you should be on the lookout for.
General abuse:
●  Arguments (frequent) between elderly person and caregiver
●  Changes in personality of the elderly person
● Odd/unusual/different behaviour.
Physical abuse:
● Unexplained injuries
● Broken bones/sprains/dislocations
● Medication irregularities
● Broken glasses
● Signs of restraint
●  Caregiver refuses to let the elder be seen alone.
Emotional abuse:
●  Experience of threatening, bullying or controlling behaviour from caregiver
●  Dementia-like behaviour from elder – rocking, mumbling, sucking thumb.
Sexual abuse:
● Bruises around genitals
●  Unexplained genital infections or STDs
●  Sudden changes in financial situation
●  Missing items/cash from the elder's house
●  Suspicious will/policy/power of attorney changes
●  Addition of names of documents
●  Unpaid bills/lack of medical care (despite a healthy financial situation)
●  Financial activity taking place when the older person is incapacitated
●  Unnecessary services being provided.
Healthcare fraud:
● Duplicate medical bills
● Evidence of over/under-medication
●  Evidence of inadequate care pertaining to the amount paid
●  Problems in the care facility.
Acting on elder abuse
There are three things you must do to prevent elder abuse:
Activity 3C
3.5 – Assist the person to access other support services and the complaints mechanisms as required
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Give the client the knowledge and ability to complain
●  Assist the client in lodging complaints in accordance with organisational complaints procedure
●  Demonstrate professionalism and sensitivity in handling complaints, being open to listening to clients with complaints.
Give the client the knowledge and ability to complain
You should research ways to enable clients to complain. There may be a complaints scheme in place so that clients can put in formal complaints about services.
The first process should be to lodge a complaint with the service provider before anything else – this will result in the quickest and most direct resolution to the problem. The complainant is allowed to take an advocate with them to meetings with providers as support and to ensure they are not taken advantage of.
If discussion with aged service providers is impossible or proves unproductive, the next stage is to lodge a complaint with a government complaints scheme. For example, the government has an Aged Care Complaints Scheme, which is a free service for anyone to raise concerns about the quality of care/services delivered to any aged care services subsidised by the Australian government; this includes residential care, home care and HACC services. They can be contacted online by filling in a complaint form or via phone on 1800 550 552.
As mentioned previously mentioned, the topics that can be complained about include:
● Quality of care
● Choice of activities
● Catering
● Personal care
● Physical environment
● Communication quality.
The people who can complain include:
● Care recipients
●  Representatives of care recipients
● Family members
● Friends
● Legal representatives
● Aged care staff
● Volunteers
● Health professionals.
Assist the client in lodging a complaint
Clients are entitled to complain if they are dissatisfied with a service or any aspect of it – they must be made aware of this and the process for lodging a complaint; this should be standard practice in your organisation. Most organisations have a client grievance policy or procedure which will outline the accepted way to handle complaints, and how to support the client throughout the process.
People have the right to express themselves whether that is artistically, politically or commercially. You should not prohibit the expression of opinions or not give the opportunity to do so.
The complaints process
Your organisation will have a process for complaints and how to treat them. It is important that you know what this is and your role within it.
In complaints management, it is usually a three step process:
●  Talk to the people directly involved with the complaint, to attempt to solve the problem
●  Take the issue higher up, if initial discussions are unproductive
●  Take the complaint to an agency or refer the client to an advocacy service.
Depending on the nature of the complaint, there are several outcomes of complaints:
●  No further action is taken (but the incident documented)
●  The complaint is investigated
●  The complaint is referred to another person/department
●  The client takes action (after having their options explained to them)
●  The client is compensated or appeased, e.g. through an apology
Handling complaints
You will need tact and empathy to handle complaints from clients so that you can help to get to the root of the problem and minimise hostility.
When dealing with complaints, there are some general tips to help minimise hostility:
●  Establish and maintain a rapport with the client
●  Discuss issues in a broad sense
●  Be open to talking about anything the client wishes to discuss

questions:
1. Name five rights that you will need to assist an older person to understand.
*
2. What is the process for an older person wishing to make a complaint regarding their aged care? (Maximum 300 words)
*
3. Identify the five major rights that older people have regarding care and give an example of details for each with a method to uphold these rights during service delivery.
*
4. How would you respond if you witnessed or knew an older person's rights were being violated? (Maximum 100 words)
*
5. Define elderly abuse and methods to identify financial, physical and emotional neglect. (Maximum 300 words)
*
6. Your assessor will provide you with example organisational guidelines for responding to elderly abuse cases. Report a case of financial abuse according to these guidelines and include the following information:                                                               
	Name: Derek Friend                                       
	Age: 80                                                     
	Residence: living at home   
	Two carers attend daily, one in the morning and one in the evening    
	Derek has commented that his cheque book has gone missing                                             
	Family members concerned about missing cash
	Date                                                             
	Your name                                              
	Other relevant details.
*
7. Give six topics a client might base complaints on.
*
8. Refer to Case Study B - Individual’s Rights and Complaint Mechanisms. Read the information given on Bob and the complaint you have received from Sarah.   
Complete the complaints form with this information.  
*
9. List five possible outcomes of complaints.
