Unit of Competency
Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to respond to the goals and aspirations of older people and provide support services in a manner that focuses on improving health outcomes and quality of life, using a person-centred approach.
This unit applies to support workers in residential or community contexts.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
4.   Promote health and re-ablement of older people
4.1 Encourage the older person to engage as actively as possible in all living activities and provide them with information and support to do so
4.2 Assist the older person to recognise the impact that changes associated with ageing may have on their activities of living
4.3 Identify strategies and opportunities that maximise engagement and promote healthy lifestyle practices
4.4 Identify and utilise aids and modifications that promote individual strengths and capacities to assist with independent living in the older person’s environment
4.5 Discuss situations of risk or potential risk associated with ageing
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
●  Responded to the goals and aspirations of at least 2 older people, 1 in a simulated environment and 1 in the workplace:
o employing flexible, adaptable and person-centred approaches to empower the individual
o recognising and responding appropriately to situations of risk or potential risk
●  Used oral communication skills to maintain positive and respectful relationships.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
●  Structure and profile of the aged care sector:
o residential aged care sector
o home and community support sector
o current best practice service delivery models
o relevant agencies and referral networks for support services
●  Key issues facing older people, including:
o stereotypical attitudes and myths
o the impact of social devaluation on an individual’s quality of life
●  Implications for work in the sector, including:
o concepts of positive, active and healthy ageing
o rights-based approaches
o person-centred practice
o consumer directed care
o palliative approach
o empowerment and disempowerment
o reablement and effective reablement strategies
●  The ageing process and related physiological and psychological changes, including sexuality and gender issues
●  Strategies that the older person may adopt to promote healthy lifestyle practices
●  Legal and ethical considerations for working with older people, including:
o codes of practice
o discrimination
o dignity of risk
o duty of care
o human rights
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations
o work health and safety
●  Indicators of abuse and/or neglect, including:
o physical
o sexual
o psychological
o financial
●  Reporting requirements for suspected abuse situations
●  The impact of one's own attitudes on working with older people.
Assessment Conditions
All aspects of the performance evidence must have been demonstrated using simulation prior to being demonstrated in the workplace. The following conditions must be met for this unit:
●  Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
o relevant organisation policies and procedures
o relevant aids to assist with independent living.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
4. Promote health and re-ablement of older people
4.1.   Encourage the older person to engage as actively as possible in all living activities and provide them with information and support to do so
4.2.  Assist the older person to recognise the impact that changes associated with ageing may have on their activities of living
4.3.  Identify strategies and opportunities that maximise engagement and promote healthy lifestyle practices
4.4.   Identify and utilise aids and modifications that promote individual strengths and capacities to assist with independent living in the older person’s environment
4.5.  Discuss situations of risk or potential risk associated with ageing
4.1 – Encourage the older person to engage as actively as possible in all living activities and provide them with information and support to do so
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Engage in re-ablement processes to assist clients in relearning skills necessary to engage in living activities
●  Identify actions that can be taken, or adaptations that can be made, to assist clients to engage as actively as possible in all living activities.
Encouraging living activities
Living activities are those activities that a client will need to partake in to live independently.These may include:
●  Cooking and feeding oneself
● Cleaning oneself/bathing
● Dressing
● Grooming
● Household chores
● Leisure.
Re-ablement
Re-ablement involves helping people learn or perhaps more often relearn the skills they need for everyday living. Older people may have lost these skills through the deterioration of health and their reliance on support. It is a new approach to care that means carers guide client’s on tasks, doing them with the client instead of doing them for the client.
Care workers will have to take the role of guide and supervisor – this will mean standing back and letting the client have a go instead of doing it for them.
Care workers will have to discuss the goals of the client with them so that they can think of tasks that can help the client to achieve them. Larger goals should be split into smaller targets that result in the larger goal being accomplished. For example, a large goal for a client could be to prepare their own meals; this could be split into smaller goals specific to their needs.
Support should be adjusted for each client on an individual basis; support should be decreased for clients who are making progress and achieving their targets, but it should be increased for those who are struggling.
Case study
A client called Mr S has recently asked for a care worker to visit her at home for help preparing meals. He is slightly visually impaired and has osteoporosis and arthritis and uses a walking aid. An assessment was undertaken and found that he would need ongoing support for his washing and dressing tasks, although encouragement from carers could allow for some independence in this area.
Mr S used a delivery food service where frozen meals were delivered to him. He found it difficult to heat the meals because of his visual impairment – he could not read the instructions, and the struggled to see the microwave, which resulted in many burned meals.
The care workers decided to:
●  Move the microwave towards the window
●  Stick labels with cooking times written onto meals in the freezer, e.g. 6 minutes
●  Stick bright labels with raised sections to represent some of the common numbers used on the microwave, e.g. 1 minute, and 5 minutes.
This resulted in Mr S being able to prepare meals on his own. After a few weeks, he was able to manage with just two visits instead of the three he had been having. These visits were for help with getting washed and dressed either for the day or for bed.
Activity 4A
4.2 – Assist the older person to recognise the impact that changes associated with ageing may have on their activities of living
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Recognise the symptoms of a range of age-related conditions and be able to assist older persons to assess the impact of these conditions on their daily lives.
General physical changes associated with ageing
As people age, their body naturally deteriorates – this can lead to changes in their physical conditioning.
Some common factors are:
●  Vision – eyes dry up and lens becomes less accurate. Therefore, sight can become blurry and out of focus – glasses and contact lenses may need to be used as corrective measures
●  Hearing – the changing ear structure and nerves can lessen hearing ranges, with higher frequencies more difficult to hear
●  Taste and smell – the senses of smell and taste can fade, leading to a decreased appetite and weight loss
●  Immunity – the immune system gets weaker as we age, with white blood cells being less effective – leading to more frequent infections
●  Hair and nails – hair becomes thinner and drier, leading to possible itching and discomfort, as well as hair loss. Nails become brittle and fungal infections can become more common
●  Hormones – these can result in a multitude of problems and can affect metabolism, endocrine glands and sexual function
●  Teeth and gums – teeth weaken and dry out, with less saliva produced by glands. Coupled with receding gums, these can result in a dry mouth, tooth decay/loss, bad breath, infections and gum disease
●  Face – as well as wrinkles and age spots, facial contours may shift, leading to droopy, sagging skin
●  Body shape – bone changes can lead to spine curvature and a decrease in standing height. Muscle may waste away, and fat metabolism can become impaired, making maintaining weight more difficult
●  Skin – skin oil is produced less, leading to dry and itchy skin. It becomes less flexible and more fragile – this can lead to easy bruising, wrinkles, age spots and skin tags
●  Bones, joints and muscles – bones become less dense and shrink, making them more prone to breaks; muscle mass decreases and they become weaker; joints become painful, less flexible and inflamed.
Arthritis and other musculoskeletal problems
This condition causes pain, stiffness and inflammation within a joint – it can affect people of all ages, with 3.85 million Australians affected by it (set to rise to seven million by 2050). In actual fact, the term arthritis covers over 100 medical conditions, so the degree and impact it has on a particular person can vary depending on the type of arthritic condition they have. The three most common conditions are osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis and gout, with over 95 per cent of cases in Australia being these.
In general, it impairs the ability to move the joints freely and can interfere with daily tasks such as driving, walking and handling things.
However, it is not a natural part of ageing and shouldn't be accepted as such – 2.4 million of those affected in Australia are of working age. The problem is that it's not curable yet, and can only be managed via medication (such as anti-inflammatory drugs, painkillers) or physiotherapy.
Common arthritic symptoms include:
●  Joint pain, tenderness and stiffness
●  Inflammation in and around the joints
●  Restricted movement of the joints
●  Warmth and redness of the skin over the affected joint
●  Weakness and muscle wasting.
Diabetes
This is where insulin is not produced in sufficient amounts by the body to convert sugar (glucose) into energy. Instead, it stays in the bloodstream – this can be harmful to internal organs. It can be controlled with medication though, and most diabetics carry a medical alert bracelet, necklace or card (as well as glucose sources for emergencies).
Symptoms are:
● Confusion
● Sweating
● Dizziness
● Weakness
● Headache
● Lack of focus
● Hunger
●  Numbness (lips and fingers)
● Trembling
●  Irritability
● Slurred speech
●  Fitting
● Loss of coordination
● Loss of consciousness.
There are two types of diabetes – type 1 and type 2.
Type 1 diabetes is an auto-immune condition where the immune system destroys insulin-producing cells in the pancreas. There is no known cause a there is no known prevention or cure for it at present. It accounts for around 15 percent of all diabetes cases, with symptoms including excessive thirst and urination, inexplicable weight loss, blurred vision, fatigue and weakness. The management of the condition is done
by multiple daily insulin injections or the use of an insulin pump. Making healthy lifestyle choices can also minimise the impact of it, even though bad lifestyle choices didn't cause the condition.
Type 2 diabetes is where insulin is not produced in sufficient amounts by the pancreas to convert sugar (glucose) into energy. Instead, it stays in the bloodstream – this can be harmful to internal organs. It can be controlled with medication though, and most diabetics carry a medical alert bracelet, necklace or card (as well as glucose sources for emergencies). This is the most common form of diabetes, accounting for around 85 percent of cases. While the cause is partly genetic, lifestyle factors such as being overweight, having a poor diet, high blood pressure and having excess fat around the weight.
Frailty and deconditioning
Frailty is closely linked to ageing and covers disability, chronic diseases or dependency. It can result in things like delirium and falls and means that those who are considered "frail" must be closely monitored.
Heart and lung disease
Causes of heart and lung disease are:
● Smoking
● Obesity
● High cholesterol.
The types of lung disease are:
● Asthma
●  Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
● Bronchitis
● Emphysema
● Cystic fibrosis
● Pneumonia
● Tuberculosis
● Lung cancer
●  Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
●  Pneumoconiosis
●  Interstitial lung disease (ILD).
Heart disease happens when the blood supply to the heart becomes blocked or interrupted by a build- up of fatty substances in the coronary arteries. If left untreated, it can lead to a heart attack.
The best way to deal with heart and lung disease is through positive lifestyle changes and some medications that may thin the blood.
Incontinence
This is when people pass urine unintentionally and becomes more common with age, affecting about twice as many women as men. There are two types of incontinence – stress and urge incontinence. Stress incontinence is when the pelvic muscles are too weak to contract and prevent urination – this can cause leakage when the bladder is under pressure when people laugh or cough. Urge incontinence is when urine leaks soon after you have passed urine or when there is an intense urge to urinate.
Again, it is not an inevitable part of ageing and can affect younger people too. Effective treatments include making positive lifestyle changes, strengthening the pelvic floor muscles and bladder training (waiting longer between urination).
Other treatments include:
● Absorbent pads
●  Portable external bladder systems
● Surgical treatment
○  to reduce pressure on the bladder
○  to strengthen the muscles preventing urination
○  to increase the bladder size
○  to implant a device to stimulate the detrusor muscles.
Skin disorders (including skin cancers)
Skin cancer is the abnormal growth of skin cells and occurs often on areas of skin that have been heavily exposed to sunlight. The three major types of skin cancer are basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and melanoma. It is vital that early detection is facilitated, as this gives the best chance of curing the cancer.
Other skin conditions include things like eczema, and warts, etc. These need to be managed with appropriate creams and lifestyle choices, which should be prescribed by a doctor.
Stroke
This happens when the blood supply to part of the brain is cut off. In this case, prompt medical treatment is essential in preventing lasting damage to the body. You will need to phone 000 if you suspect a client is having a stroke.
It is diagnosed used the concept of FAST – face, arms, speech, time:
●  Face – drooping of the face on one side, around the eyes and mouth, an inability to smile
●  Arms – may not be able lift one or both arms and maintain their position
●  Speech – slurred and muddled speech, inability to talk at all
●  Time – dial 000 immediately if you see any of these symptoms.
People most at risk of strokes are over-65s and underlying conditions such as heart disease and diabetes increase the risk. Things like being overweight, high cholesterol, poor diet, lack of exercise,
high blood pressure, and an irregular heartbeat are all contributing factors to a stroke.
They can be treated with medications, but surgery may be required at times. In terms of aged care though, the most common things you will be dealing with are people after a stroke. This can involve long rehabilitation periods which may or may not recover the independence of the affected individual. It can involve specialists such as physiotherapists, psychologists, occupational therapists, speech therapists and specialist nurses and doctors.
Vascular disease
This is a hardening of the arteries caused by a thickening of the artery lining from fatty deposits. This makes it hard for blood to flow freely around the body – the areas where the blood cannot get will suffer impaired function, tissue damage and it can even cause death if vital organs are not receiving enough blood. The most common arteries affected are those of the heart, brain aand legs not receiving enough blood. The most common arteries affected are those of the heart, brain and legs.
Symptoms can include:
●  Pain at and beyond the site of the blockage
● Heart attack (heart)
● Stroke (brain)
● Cramping (legs).
Again, in terms of managing the disease, it is about adopting a healthy lifestyle – however, medication may cause strokes or heart attacks as a side effect, so this is avoided. If you are already on treatment for high blood pressure or diabetes, you should maintain this.
As people age and their bodies and minds may cease to function as well as in their younger days, the activities they can carry out will change. However, people may struggle to accept the lifestyle changes that this entails.
When working with older people, you may need to inform them of their limitations; for example, they cannot carry out routine physical tasks like they may have done in their younger days. Things like home DIY tasks that involve coordination and balance can cease to be safe if your senses are not functioning at their best – if they are going up and down a ladder, they may fall off and seriously injure themselves; if they are using sharp objects, they may cut themselves, etc.
This may affect their scheduling – they cannot simply get up and do things as freely as they used to, and they may require assistance in daily life. This does not necessarily mean they are incapable of performing everyday tasks.
Other changes on their living activities may include:
●  Taking medication at specified times
●  Budgeting (as they may have limited income)
●  Need to rest more (as muscles and body weaken)
●  More visits to the doctors (to monitor and identify conditions associated with ageing)
●  Cannot drive anymore (due to deteriorating vision)
●  Need for home help.
Older people who are affected by any of the above need to be aware of their limitations by their carers and family; however, you should work with them to ensure that they can enjoy as much of the activities they desire as possible. This can involve making provisions for assistance or the encouragement for them to partake in new activities more suited to their ability, so that their life doesn't feel void.
Gender and sexuality
Whilst it may be expected that older people may experience changes in the areas of gender and sexuality as they age, this belief may actually be a form of ageism that is damaging to the individual. Older persons may still experience sexual desire, and will still identify with a sexual orientation, which may be heterosexual, homosexual, or bisexual.
As they age, older people may find that they are discriminated against in the fields of gender and sexuality, and are unable to express or engage in sexual activity for this reason. As a care provider for the elderly, it is important to recognise the presence of sexual desire in your clients, and to allow them to express this as part of their lifestyle. However, it is also important to recognise when sexual behaviour becomes inappropriate and to intervene appropriately. For example, if an elderly person is displaying inappropriate sexual behaviour toward a staff member or other service users.
Mental health and sexual behaviour
The sexual behaviour of older people may be affected by the presence of conditions such as Alzheimer’s or dementia. As these conditions affect the brain, they may cause unpredictable changes in a person’s sexual attitudes and behaviours.
This may involve:
●  More or less interest in sex
● Less sexual inhibition
●  Decreased ability to engage in sexual activity
● Sexual aggression
● Challenging sexual behaviour.
These changes in sexual behaviour can create difficulties for the client and their families as they adjust to the person’s changing mannerisms. Other difficulties may arise for a care provider. Issues may include misinterpretation of non-sexual behaviours as sexual; for example, if a person with dementia believes that a person in the room is a previous or deceased partner, they may act affectionately, or even sexually, towards them.
More information may be found at: https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/documents_info.php?documentID=129 (Accessed 01.08.19)
Policy and procedure
You must be aware of your own legal and ethical obligations when handling issues of gender and sexuality in the aged care sector.
This includes:
●  Following your organisation’s sexuality policy
●  Complying with privacy law
●  Respecting the rights of individuals to express their sexuality
●  Following policy and procedure to respond to inappropriate sexual behaviours, or suspicion of sexual abuse.
Activity 4B
4.3 – Identify strategies and opportunities that maximise engagement and promote healthy lifestyle practices
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
●  Identify, and implement, a range of strategies to improve the health and wellbeing of clients according to the specific needs and capability of the client
●  Promote healthy eating and exercise.
Encouraging healthy lifestyle
A healthy lifestyle is important to preventing and managing many of the debilitating conditions associated with ageing. Social and recreational activities are vital to an individual’s general health and wellbeing as they help to keep them fit, active and ‘keeps the mind working.’
If your client does not already have social or recreational activities in place, it is your duty to find out what their preferences are and inform them of the activities available to them in their area. Social and recreational activities help to combat isolation that many elderly individuals or others in care can encounter. The client may have a network of individuals that either visit them or are available to help with the problem of isolation or general care when you are not around.
There are various strategies that older people can adopt to live a healthier lifestyle:
●  Taking regular exercise (even just walks)
●  Maintaining a healthy diet (eat at least three solid meals a day, with nutritional variety)
●  Mental stimulation (playing games, problem-solving activities, puzzles)
● Hobbies
●  Embrace variety (maintaining the same routine and always doing the same things can affect you psychologically, causing a depression and monotony)
●  Engage with remaining family members
● Learn new things
●  Take a class/join a club
● Travel (if possible)
●  Get vaccinations for common infections.
Doing most or all of these will ensure that elderly people are physically and mentally stimulated enough to minimise the deterioration to their bodies.
They should also be tailored to the individual's interests and life activities, if possible. Forcing people to partake in things they are not interested in will only worsen their satisfaction levels with the care. Try
and find things in common, if possible, between yourself and the elders or (if at a residential home) between the residents. If they have hobbies, see if you can accommodate them into their daily routine.
If dealing with home care, they may have activities and interests scheduled on a day-to-day basis and you should try and fit their care needs in around these things – if you force them to give up their life activities and interests to receive home care, then the whole advantage of living in the community disappears for them; consequently, they may become socially isolated and depressed.
Eating healthily
Eating healthily is about ensuring that your diet is balanced – not having too much or too little of any of the five food groups.
‘The Australian Dietary Guidelines inform people of different ages, life stages and gender, the minimum number of serves from each food group they need to eat each day, to make sure they get the full amount of nutrients their body needs’ source: http://www.eatforhealth.gov.au/food-essentials (Accessed 01.08.19)

Though making clients aware that they need to be careful, you should never scare a client or discourage them from taking part in activities.
Communication strategies
There are a variety of ways you can get the information across.
Understand that different people will respond to different methods; below are a few that you can use:
● Verbal communication
● Brochures
● Leaflets
● Posters
● Online
● Advertising.

Questions:
1.  In this activity you have to encourage an older person to engage as actively as possible in three living activities through re-ablement. You will need to clearly identify the three activities and any information, support and materials that will be required to enable them to engage with these activities.
*
2.  You should identify two general physical changes associated with ageing and give a brief.
*
3. Give eight strategies older people can adopt to lead a healthy lifestyle.
*
4. What are the five different food groups?
*
5. List eight benefits of exercise.
*
6. Name four modifications and four aids that can help assist clients with independent living.
*
7. For each modification and aid you have identified, write a brief guide to its usage and list benefits for an older person.
*
8. What options are available for financing modifications and aids? (Maximum 100 words)
*
9. Discuss the following: 
 Potential risks or situations of risk associated with ageing.       
 Different communication methods available to help elderly people identify situations of risk.  
