Unit of Competency
Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to assist clients to identify their rights, voice their needs and concerns and realise their interests, rights and needs.
This unit applies to workers of all levels in a range of health or community services settings who provide services using a human rights based approach and have direct interaction with clients.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit
Pre-requisite Unit
None stated
Unit Sector
None Stated
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements  describe  the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
1.  Facilitate      the realisation  of  client interests,  rights  and needs
1.1 Discuss the rights and responsibilities of all parties with client
1.2 Provide  client  with  researched,  relevant  and  timely information on their rights and responsibilities
1.3 Assist clients to identify their own interests, rights, needs, choices and responsibilities
1.4 Identify when rights are infringed or not being met
1.5 Provide client with information on available options for meeting their rights and needs and assist them to identify their preferred option
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills)
that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be demonstrated evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Worked in collaboration with 1 client to identify their interests, needs and rights
⮚ Advocated on behalf of 1 client to achieve a specific outcome
⮚ Supported 1 client throughout an organisational or legal complaints process.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage the task and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Universal Declaration of Human Rights
⮚ Relationship between human needs and human rights
⮚ Human rights frameworks, approaches, instruments
⮚ Legal and ethical considerations (international, national, state/territory, local) related to facilitation of client rights and interests and how these impact individual workers:
o duty of care
o human rights
o mandatory reporting
o discrimination
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o informed consent
o organisation and legal complaints processes
o rights and responsibilities of clients, workers and organisations
⮚ Common risks to client safety and wellbeing
⮚ Relevance of child protection across all health and community services contexts, including duty of care when child is not the client, indicators of risk and adult disclosure
⮚ Actions that constitute discrimination and techniques for addressing it
⮚ Types of community resources, networks and referral options relevant to the nature of client service
⮚ Potential conflict between client needs and organisation requirements
⮚ Differences between negotiation, advocacy, mediation
⮚ Negotiation, advocacy, mediation techniques for the facilitation of client rights
⮚ Empowerment and disempowerment.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. Where simulation is used, it must reflect real working conditions by modelling industry operating conditions and contingencies, as well as, using suitable facilities, equipment and resources.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
1. Facilitate the realisation of client interests, rights and needs
1.1.  Discuss the rights and responsibilities of all parties with client
1.2.  Provide client with researched, relevant and timely information on their rights and responsibilities
1.3.  Assist clients to identify their own interests, rights, needs, choices and responsibilities
1.4.  Identify when rights are infringed or not being met
1.5.  Provide client with information on available options for meeting their rights and needs and assist them to identify their preferred option
1.1 – Discuss the rights and responsibilities of all parties with client
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Talk openly about the client’s rights for accessing care services
⮚ Follow your responsibilities as a worker, to provide care options
⮚ Let the client know your role and responsibilities for providing care services.
Client rights and needs
When a new client arrives at a care setting, or you go to see a new client, it is very important that you take the time to discuss their rights. Clients can feel quite vulnerable and helpless when they enter into the care system, and it is important to do what you can to counteract this. The client should not feel as though they do not have a say in their care, and you should do everything you can to empower them. The client’s rights and needs may vary, depending on their personal circumstances, so you should ensure that you know your client, their background, and have completed a service delivery plan for them.
Client’s rights may include:
⮚ Freedom of choice and association
⮚ Access to services
⮚ The right to refuse services
⮚ Personal safety and security
⮚ Access to rights protection and legal remedies.
Worker’s responsibilities may include working within:
⮚ Care/case plan outline
⮚ Job description and job role
⮚ Training received
⮚ Relevant legislation.
Discussing rights
You will need to discuss rights and responsibilities of all parties, including the client, the client’s family and all associated workers. This is so that you can establish who will do what, when they will do it, and what is acceptable and what is not, for all parties concerned.
Your client will also need to know what your role covers and doesn’t cover. To do this, you should be aware of your job role and your responsibilities.
Knowing your job role and responsibilities
You should never attempt to carry out or provide professional advice on something that you are not qualified to do, or that is unlawful. You should also know what to do when you are unsure of your job role and work instructions.
You should take note of the following:
⮚ A job description outlines the name of your job, its classification, the department it is within, the industrial award/agreement, its duties, and the job selection criteria
⮚ Within the job description should be a list of duties – these are your responsibilities to complete in your job. They will vary depending on your job role
⮚ Job criteria are a collection of the required skills, knowledge, experience and qualifications necessary to conduct your job role – you should have all of these as a minimum within your current job role. They can include such things as:
o industry qualifications
o previous work experience
o current driving licence
o communication and teamwork skills.
Do not carry out any work or use any equipment outside of your skills and knowledge. Specialist training and qualifications are required for certain tasks. Also, attempting to use equipment that you are not authorised or qualified to use, can have serious consequences for you, the client, and the organisation.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights
Human rights in Australia are taken extremely seriously; they are rights that all human beings should be granted, and will apply to those in your care.
The Australian Human Rights Commission was formed in 1986 to promote and protect the human rights of all individuals in Australia. The Commission also has statutory capabilities to educate and raise public awareness, to deal with discrimination and human rights complaints and to help develop policy and legislation   for   human   rights.   (Modified   from   the   following   source: https://www.humanrights.gov.au/about-commission-0.)
The Commission provides access to an international document called the ‘Universal Declaration of Human Rights’ (also known as the ‘Universal Declaration’). This document was first used by the General Assembly of the United Nations in 1948 to detail acceptable human rights (after the two world wars in the 20ᵗʰ century). Australia helped to create this document alongside seven other nations.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights contains:
⮚ Recognised standards for human rights, including dignity, fundamental freedoms, and equal rights
⮚ 30 articles detailing rights for all human beings, for example:
o article 1 includes – All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights
o article 3 – Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person
o article 21 includes – (2) Everyone has the right of equal access to public services in his country
o article 25 includes – (1) Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services.
Although not a legally binding document, many countries use and follow this to implement human rights.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights can be found in full at the following website link (the articles in the above text are also taken directly from the Universal Declaration at the following source: http://www.un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/index.html.
Activity 1A
1.2 – Provide client with researched, relevant and timely information on their rights and responsibilities
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Research relevant information applicable to the client’s situation
⮚ Complete research to organisational timelines and as required for the client’s situation
⮚ Inform the client on their rights and responsibilities, as relevant to their situation.
Researched, relevant and timely information
You must ensure that any information you pass on to the client is always correct and up to date. Even though they should be fully aware of all the relevant information, try not to overload them with unnecessary information, this could include background information or policies and procedures that do not concern them or their rights.
Always research any information you provide and ensure you get it from a reputable source, preferably a government website, where the information will be both reliable and up-to-date. Ensure you provide the client with the information as and when they require it, do not hold any information back that could be important to the client and their rights. Everybody has the same basic human rights. Your client (or if not possible, your client’s family) will need to ensure they know what these are.
Basic human rights, as described by the Australian Human Rights Commission, include:
⮚ Freedom of opinion or expression
⮚ Freedom of thought, conscience or religious worship
⮚ Freedom of association or peaceful assembly
⮚ Freedom from arbitrary detention.
Source: https://www.humanrights.gov.au/rights-responsibilities-2014
Human rights are universal, which means that everyone is entitled to them with no exceptions.
Human rights have developed as a concept from texts such as:
⮚ The Magna Carta 1215
⮚ The English Bill of Rights 1688
⮚ The Declaration of Independence 1776
⮚ The Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen 1789
⮚ The Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948 (as mentioned at the end of section 1.1 in this unit).
Governments have a duty to promote human rights to ensure their freedoms (listed above) are protected.
Australia has agreed to uphold and respect the seven main internationa lhuman rights treaties, namely the:
⮚ International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
⮚ International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
⮚ Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
⮚ Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
⮚ Convention on the Rights of the Child
⮚ Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
There are however limits on these rights when somebody acts in a way that may impede the rights of the other person, e.g. if someone is racist to another person; this is not allowed even though freedom of opinion and expression exists. Although it is important to research information correctly and use references such as those above to inform your understanding, you will need to interpret these and explain them in a way that the client or their family will understand.
Social justice principles
Social justice is very important in any community-based job role, as it stands for the rights of everyone in the community, in this case, your clients. Your client’s rights should be considered as fair and equal to everyone else’s. You may have already had training in equal opportunities, which will cover everyone in your organisation, as well as the surrounding community. Social justice, on the other hand, focuses more so on the vulnerable and disadvantaged people in our society.
Social justice principles aim to ensure:
⮚ Equal access to health care services for all
⮚ Isolated individuals have access to clean water and sanitation
⮚ Equal quality of health services, regardless of income.
Social justice principles look to reduce the level of health inequalities in Australia.
The four principles of social justice are:
⮚ Equity
⮚ Access
⮚ Participation
⮚ Rights.
Activity 1B
1.3 – Assist clients to identify their own interests, rights, needs, choices and responsibilities
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Provide guidance to clients to help them determine their own interests and needs
⮚ Give information to clients on client rights, responsibilities and choices
⮚ Help clients to make healthy decisions which support their own needs and situation.
What are the client’s interests, rights, needs choices, preferences and responsibilities? People will have a choice to an extent over the type and quantity of care they receive. These decisions will be made by themselves and their advocates. They may also depend on what their needs and rights are.
The types of choices they may need to make include:
⮚ Type of care – residential or home care? If residential, high (nursing home) or low (hostel) care?
⮚ Frequency of care
⮚ Care provider
⮚ Cost of care.
Interests
Each client you work with will have different social interests. It is part of your responsibility to discover what it is that the client enjoys doing or what appointments they may have on a weekly basis. Once you know what activities the client undertakes, you can ensure they have the opportunity to take part in these,
e.g. making sure that they have the right transport, resources, etc.
Social and recreational activities could include:
⮚ Shopping
⮚ Dog walking
⮚ Pet care
⮚ Arts and Crafts
⮚ Coffee mornings
⮚ Classes, e.g. dance, yoga
⮚ Special events
⮚ Video games/board games
⮚ Choirs.
Social and recreational activities are vital to an individual’s general health and wellbeing as they help to keep them fit, active and ‘keeps the mind working.’
If your client does not already have social or recreational activities in place, it is your duty to find out what their preferences are and inform them of the activities available to them in their area. Social and recreational activities help to combat isolation that many elderly individuals or others in care can encounter. The client may have a network of individuals that either visit them or are available to help with the problem of isolation or general care when you are not around.
Gather information either through:
⮚ An informal chat with the client
⮚ Friends and family
⮚ Observation, e.g. you could notice photographs of them in their garden and ask them if they like to garden. (You could then ask if they would like to come with you to the garden centre to pick some plants out for the garden at the centre/home)
⮚ A more formal written document, e.g. a questionnaire.
Rights
You will need to be able to transfer legal rights into the everyday provision of services. This will depend on the sector and the client; below is an application of rights of older people.
In December 1991, the United Nations created a set of Principles for Older Persons – they recommended that all member governments should incorporate them into their frameworks for older people and their care.
They are based on the following five principles:
⮚ Independence
⮚ Participation
⮚ Care
⮚ Self-fulfilment
⮚ Dignity.
The following table outlines the specific aspects of each principle:
Specific details
⮚ To access to adequate food, water, shelter, clothing, and health care through the provision of income, family and community support and help wise appropriate levels of institutional care which provide protection, rehabilitation and social and mental stimulation in a humane and secure environment
⮚ To exercise human rights and fundamental freedoms when residing in any shelter, care and treatment facility including full respect for their dignity, beliefs, needs and privacy and for the right to make decisions about their care and quality of life.
⮚ To pursue opportunities for the full development of their potential
⮚ To access the education, cultural, spiritual and recreational resources of society.
⮚ To be treated fairly regardless of age, gender, racial or ethnic background, disability or other status, and to be valued independently of their economic contributions
⮚ To live in dignity and security and to be free of exploitation and physical or mental abuse
⮚ To exercise personal autonomy in health care decision making, including the right to die with dignity by assenting to or rejecting treatment designed solely to prolong life.
Source: http://www.sa.agedrights.asn.au/abuse_prevention/rights-of-older-people
Needs
You should assist your client in identifying their personal needs so that you can plan for their care. You will need to think about their physical and emotional security and ask clients about their circumstances.
Things to consider:
⮚ Sensory difficulties: such as the loss or impairment of sight and hearing
⮚ Mobility issues: such as the need for a wheelchair or electric wheelchair
⮚ Conditions: such as depression, dementia or incontinence
⮚ Injuries: such as broken bones or bruising
⮚ Cultural needs: such as differences in language or attitude towards male carers
⮚ Diet: are there any allergies, foods the client does not like or cannot eat because of personal or religious beliefs?
Support and care:
⮚ Household assistance and maintenance, for example, if the client needs help with dressing, cooking, eating or cleaning and odd jobs like replacing bulbs
⮚ Economic support – for example, does the client need help claiming benefits?
Choices
It is important for clients to feel they have choices – for example, whether they take part in an activity, hobbies, what to wear, what to eat and when, etc. This is especially important for clients who are staying in an institution such as a nursing home, rehabilitation centre or children’s home.
Ideally, the clients should be able to speak for themselves and make their own choices, but sometimes you will find this is not possible, especially when dealing with more vulnerable clients with psychological health issues and certain debilitating diseases/disabilities. You will know your client and whether they are able to speak for themselves or if you need to find an appropriate person to do this for them, i.e. a health professional or family member.
Responsibilities
Client’s responsibilities will be unique to each client. You will need to agree what it is that they are willing and able to do for themselves. For example – a client may want some help getting their socks on, but are able to manage their shoes themselves. You may be asked to prepare dinner for a client, but the client may want to wash up afterwards.
Activity 1C
1.4 – Identify when rights are infringed or not being met
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Assess if the rights of clients are being maintained
⮚ Determine if clients are experiencing any form of abuse
⮚ Decide if clients are suffering from neglect or exploitation.
Infringement of rights
To infringe on someone’s needs or rights is to not only potentially break the law or lawful agreement but to also limit or undermine their needs and rights. This could not only go against their human rights but also break a number of standards, laws and organisational policies and procedures. Through talking to your client, you will be able to see if they are getting the right care and access to services. You should ensure your client is aware of what they are entitled to and the kind of care they deserve/have a right to. If your client is unable to talk themselves, you may need to use an advocate, or use direct observation.
Abuse
People may be abused in their own homes while using services or care facilities or in relatives' homes. Abuse is any instance where someone takes advantage of someone else.
It can include:
⮚ Financial exploitation – this is the unauthorised use of a person’s money or their property by either a caregiver or an external party. The types of practices include:
o stealing money
o forging cheques/credit cards/accounts
o forging signatures
o identity theft
o requesting them to pay money to claim a 'prize'
o charity scams
o investment fraud
⮚ Physical abuse – this is the deliberate use of force on a person causing them pain, injury or disability. It includes violent assaults, using drugs (inappropriately), restraining them or keeping them captive
⮚ Emotional abuse – also known as psychological abuse, this involves treating people in any way that causes them distress or emotional pain. This can include:
o verbal abuse – threats, intimidation, yelling, humiliation, placing blame
o non-verbal abuse – ignoring, social isolation, terrorising behaviour
⮚ Sexual abuse – this includes contact with another without their consent; this can mean physical sex acts but also includes making them watch sex acts, pornography, or forcing them to undress
⮚ Neglect/abandonment – this includes failure to fulfil duties. It can be intentional or unintentional, based on ignorance or denial of the care requirements for the person
⮚ Healthcare fraud – this can be committed by care providers or medical personnel; it includes:
o charging for healthcare they don't provide
o overcharging for services
o taking 'kickbacks' (bonuses) for referring patients to providers of certain drugs
o over/under-medicating
o recommending incorrect/fraudulent remedies for medical conditions/illnesses
o Medicare fraud.
Symptoms can be difficult to recognise, especially if your client is elderly, has communication issues, is mentally ill or is a child. It can be easy for people to explain away the signs, and many people may dismiss them as a minor issue. However, you have a legal obligation and duty of care to report and prompt investigation if you are at all concerned.
The following are things you should be on the lookout for:
⮚ General abuse:
o arguments (frequent) between person and caregiver
o changes in personality of the person
o odd behaviour
⮚ Physical abuse:

o desertion in a public place
⮚ Financial exploitation:
o unexplained withdrawals from accounts
o sudden changes in financial situation
o missing items/cash
o suspicious will/policy/power of attorney changes
o addition of names of documents
o unpaid bills/lack of medical care (despite a healthy financial situation)
o financial activity taking place when the person is incapacitated
o unnecessary services being provided
➢ Healthcare fraud:
o duplicate medical bills
o evidence of over/under-medication
o evidence of inadequate care pertaining to the amount paid
o problems in the care facility.
It is essential that you report abuse. If you know about abuse and fail to act, you could be prosecuted for neglect yourself. You may not know all the details – you may only be suspicious – but it is still vital that you pass any information regarding abuse onto the proper authorities. There are a range of Government agencies that you can report to including disability services, child services and the police services. You will need to contact the relevant authorities in your state.
Negligence laws
To restrict the number of negligence claims, there are laws. For example, in Queensland, these laws relate to professional liability for damages related to negligence.
For example:
⮚ Personal Injuries Proceedings Act 2002 (Qld)
⮚ Civil Liability Act 2003 (Qld).
The following principles apply to negligence:
⮚ It does not apply if the risk of the activity was obvious/made clear
⮚ What is expected is dependent on the skill level/experience of the worker
⮚ People are given a reasonable amount of information to make informed decisions on optional actions (e.g. medical treatment)
⮚ Apologies/expressions of regret do not amount to admitting liability/fault and will hold no weight in court
⮚ First aid personnel have no liability in emergency situations, as long as their actions are in good faith and without reckless disregard for safety.
There are many options available to your client, depending on their needs. You should discuss with your client what their needs are and locate appropriate services or support, before discussing with them their options and allowing them to decide which option they are happy to follow through. You may need to advocate for your client in this situation and contact the required service, people and/or agencies. There are many support services available in both residential environments and the community. These services will be run by the government, charities and just general good Samaritans who want to help others.
Support and services can include:
⮚ Pensions
⮚ Grants
⮚ Disability payments and services
⮚ Education services
⮚ Cleaning
⮚ Veteran facilities
⮚ Medical and pharmaceutical funding
⮚ Acute care
⮚ Coffee mornings
⮚ Trips/excursions
⮚ Lunches with fellow residents or elderly individuals in the community
⮚ Counselling
⮚ Dementia support programs
⮚ Information services
⮚ Seniors' cards that allow discounts on a range of products and services
⮚ Travel passes.
The individual may already be aware and in receipt of a number of the above support services, such as a pension but they may not be aware of others that they could actually benefit from. It is part of your responsibility to monitor the individual and decide if they could benefit from any of the services you know of. You should try and keep up to date with local and government support services at all times, even if it is just knowing about local coffee mornings which could help the individual socialise and maintain their independence.
If you believe an individual can benefit from a service, you should discuss it with the relevant personnel and the client. You can determine if the individual wants to utilise the service and if their relatives or advocates feel as though it is appropriate. You will also need to determine if the individual is entitled to the support, needs funding or is entitled to funding.
Some support services may not require funding, such as coffee mornings; in this case, you can just discuss the possibility of attending with the client and encourage them to go where you feel it could be beneficial to them. You will need to explain the scope of the service to the client and/or their advocate. You will need to inform them of what the service involves, what it entitles the individual to, days, times, and how much it will cost or what they will need i.e. transport.
Activity 1E

Questions:
1. Explain how you can assist clients to identify their own interests, rights and needs.
*
2. From your own thinking, how would you help the client to make choices and to determine their own responsibilities with their situation.
*
3. Identify five signs that may indicate if the client’s rights are infringed or not being met.
*
4. How can you identify signs of infringement or lack of care?
*
5. What activities may be occurring to cause this? (Identify five).
*
6. What support and services are available in your area for your clients? Research if necessary.
