Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to provide individualised services in ways that support independence, as well as, physical and emotional wellbeing.
This unit applies to workers in a range of community services contexts who provide frontline support services within the context of an established individualised plan.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Sector
Not applicable
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
1. Recognise and support individual differences
1.1 Recognise and respect the person’s social, cultural and spiritual differences
1.2 Avoid imposing own values and attitudes on others and support the person to express their own identity and preferences
1.3 Consider the person’s individual needs, stage of life, development and strengths when engaging in support activities
1.4 Recognise, respect and accommodate the person’s expressions of identity and sexuality as appropriate in the context of their age or stage of life
1.5 Promote and facilitate opportunities for participation in activities that reflect the person’s individual physical, social, cultural and spiritual needs
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be demonstrated evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Safely supported at least 3 people to enhance independence and wellbeing
⮚ Performed the activities outlined in the performance criteria of this unit during a period of at least 120 hours of direct support work in at least one aged care, home and community, disability or community service organisation.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Basic human needs:
o physical
o psychological
o spiritual
o cultural
o sexual
⮚ Concept of self-actualisation
⮚ Human development across the lifespan
⮚ Wellbeing, including:
o physical
o psychological
o social
o spiritual
o cultural
o financial
o career/occupation
⮚ Individual differences, how these may be interrelated and impact on support provided
⮚ Basic requirements for good health for the person, including:
o mental health
o nutrition and hydration
o exercise
o hygiene
o lifestyle
o oral health
⮚ Mental health uses and risk and protective factors
⮚ Indications of neglect or abuse:
o physical
o sexual
o psychological
o financial
⮚ Reporting requirements for suspected abuse situations
⮚ Service delivery models and standards
⮚ Relevant funding models
⮚ Issues that impact health and well being
⮚ Impacts of community values and attitudes, including myths and stereotypes
⮚ Issues surrounding sexuality and sexual expression
⮚ Indicators of emotional concerns and issues
⮚ Support strategies, resources and networks
⮚ Legal and ethical requirements and how these are applied in an organisation and individual practice, including:
o duty of care
o dignity of risk
o human rights
o discrimination
o mandatory reporting
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in a relevant workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. Where simulation is used it must reflect real working conditions and contingencies by modelling industry operating conditions and contingencies, as well as using suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
⮚ Individualised plans and any relevant equipment outlined in the plan
⮚ Modelling of industry operating conditions including real interactions with the person and their carers.
Overall, assessment must involve some real interactions with the person and their families/carers.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
1. Recognise and support individual differences
1.1.  Recognise and respect the person’s social, cultural and spiritual differences
1.2.  Avoid imposing own values and attitudes on others and support the person to express their own identity and preferences
1.3.  Consider the person’s individual needs, stage of life, development and strengths when engaging in support activities
1.4.  Recognise, respect and accommodate the person’s expressions of identity and sexuality as appropriate in the context of their age or stage of life
1.5.  Promote and facilitate opportunities for participation in activities that reflect the person’s individual physical, social, cultural and spiritual needs
1.1 – Recognise and respect the person’s social, cultural and spiritual differences
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Define and identify a range of social, cultural and spiritual differences
⮚ Describe methods to respect differences during the care and support process.
Individual differences
Individual differences are the variations that occur from one person to another. How do people differ from each other? You will come into contact with a variety of different clients from all walks of life that require support. Your role is to recognise the differences between your clients, to respect them and provide them with the appropriate support.
Think about two of your regular clients; how are they different? One may be female; the other may be male. One may be an introvert; the other may be an extrovert. One may be physically able; the other may have a disability. One may be Christian; the other may be Muslim. Think about how these differences can impact the kind of support and care that they require.
Part of recognising and supporting individual differences within your role is to recognise and respect your clients’ social, cultural and spiritual differences. This chapter will explore what these differences are and look into ways to demonstrate respect for them.
Social differences
Social differences are the complex differences between people based on their social characteristics.
These social characteristics can include:
⮚ Race
⮚ Class
⮚ Age
⮚ Power
⮚ Gender.
Cultural differences
Cultural differences are the differences between people based on the country, society or community that they come from.
They can be differences associated with a person’s:
⮚ Country of origin
⮚ Religion
⮚ Nationality
⮚ Ethnicity
⮚ Family background
⮚ Individual experiences.
A person’s culture can have a great impact on all aspects of our life, for example:
⮚ The way they dress
⮚ The food they eat
⮚ The ceremonies and festivals they take part in

Ultimately, a person’s culture will influence their behaviour and expectations; including their expectations surrounding their care and support.
Spiritual differences
Spirituality has different meanings for different people. Take a moment to think about what you think spirituality is. Some people will think that spirituality is about religion; spiritual differences are therefore associated with peoples’ religion. Other people will think that spirituality is about getting in touch with their soul, spirit or mind (e.g. through meditation and yoga). You may come across many different spiritual beliefs within your role; some may adopt an alternative belief system relating to spirits – this is something that you would need to recognise and respect whilst providing them with support and care. A client that is spiritual may participate in ceremonies and activities that they require privacy and an appropriate environment to do.
This chapter has explored what social, cultural and spiritual differences are. As you can see, they can sometimes overlap and be interrelated. It is your job to recognise, respect and accept these differences when providing individualised support for your clients.
In what ways can you respect these differences? Ultimately, it’s about ensuring you treat your clients, regardless of their particular characteristics, in a way you would expect to be treated. You should learn to embrace the variety of differences amongst your clients. You should never make assumptions or judgements about someone’s individual differences. Listen to your clients, acknowledge their views and opinions and develop an understanding of them as an individual so that you can better support and care for them.
Activity 1A
1.2 – Avoid imposing own values and attitudes on others and support the person to express their own identity and preferences
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Summarise own values and attitudes and potent impact of imposing them on a person
⮚ Describe methods to support a person to express their own identity and preferences.
Your own values and attitudes
Your values are principles, qualities or standards that you attach worth or importance to or hold in high regard. These values will guide the way that you live your life, affect the decisions that you make and influence the judgements that you make. Your attitudes can be related to your beliefs, feelings and behaviour tendencies. An attitude often describes what you think is the ‘proper’ way of doing something. The terms values and attitudes can often be used interchangeably – the attitudes that you feel strongly about can be considered to be your values. Just because you have to accept and respect your clients’ differences, it doesn’t mean that you cannot have your own. You have the right to your own values and beliefs and shouldn’t have someone else’s forced onto you – your clients have the same right. When you are providing support and care for them, it is important not to impose your own values and attitudes onto them.
Remember that there is no right or wrong value, belief or attitude – they’re personal to the individual, and nobody should ever be discriminated against because of these. This also means that your own values and attitudes should never impact the care, support and treatment of any of your clients. The care and support that you provide for your clients should always be based on their values – not yours. Your care and support should never be based on what you feel is right; it should be based on what is right for that particular client. You should never try to influence their beliefs, feelings, behaviours, values or attitudes. This can sometimes occur unintentionally if you don’t understand your own values and attitudes.
Self-awareness is one of the best tools you can use to avoid imposing your values and attitudes onto others. It is extremely important to develop an awareness and understanding of your own values and attitudes as they are essential in forming your relationships with others. Knowing what your own values and attitudes are can help you to push them aside and work effectively and appropriately with your clients. Take a moment to think about your own values and attitudes. What do you hold in high regard? What do you think is important?
For example, you may value:
⮚ Good manners
⮚ Family
⮚ Human life
⮚ The environment
⮚ The chance to learn.
Another way that you can avoid imposing your values or attitudes on others is to adopt a neutral position. Although this will be quite difficult, a neutral attitude can allow you to keep your values in check. In order to adopt a neutral attitude, you will need to listen to and acknowledge what your clients have to say without applying your own bias or judgement. It comes down to accepting that everyone is different and understanding that your own values and attitudes are not relevant to the care and support you are providing for your clients.
Supporting clients to express their own identity and preferences
Everyone has the right to express their own identity. You’re allowed to wear what you want, eat what you want and listen to the music that you want to (along with many, many other things). Your clients have this right too, even if they rely on someone else’s care and support to do so. Within your role, you may find that you need to help your clients express their own identity and preferences. Who are they as a person? Your clients should feel as though they can be themselves without being mocked or judged – they have the freedom to be themselves.
Think about the different ways that you can support a client to express their own identity and preferences. You should encourage them to share what makes them unique so that you can support them in expressing their identity and preferences. What do they love? What are they good at? What are their likes and dislikes?
At the end of the day, your clients should be encouraged and allowed to be honest, say exactly how they feel and tell you exactly what they want. Your job is to encourage them to share their identity and preferences with you so that you can support them in expressing them.
Activity 1B
1.3 – Consider the person’s individual needs, stage of life, development and strengths when engaging in support activities
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Outline a person’s individual needs, their stage of life and development, and their strengths
⮚ Give relevant considerations when applying this information to engage in support activities.
Individual needs
It is important to consider the person’s individual needs when engaging in support activities. We know that no two clients are the same, but what are their specific needs? Clients will have many needs, and these needs will differ from one client to another. A good place to start with individual needs is to assess the different basic human needs and how these can differ between clients.
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs
A popular way to look at basic human needs is to refer to Maslow’s hierarchy of needs. It suggests that people are motivated to achieve certain needs, starting with basic physiological needs and eventually reaching self-actualisation. It’s worth noting that these different needs are necessarily separated; they are closely related. Although this hierarchy of needs is related to motivation, it is useful to consider it when striving to meet your clients’ needs. The different needs outlined in Maslow’s hierarchy include physiological (physical) needs and psychological needs. These psychological needs include safety needs, social needs, esteem needs and the need for self-actualisation.
Self- actualisation
Esteem
Social
Safety
Physiological
Physiological needs
Physiological needs are the physical requirements that are necessary for human survival. They are considered as the most important needs and should be a priority. If these needs are not met, then the human body will not be able to function properly and will be at risk of failing. Also known as biological needs, they include air, water, food, sleep, incontinence, shelter and warmth.
Think about the support you give your clients – how does it meet these needs? You provide them with adequate bathroom facilities, three healthy meals a day, a warm and dry bed to rest
and sleep in and clean water. What could you do if one of these needs wasn’t being met? For example, what could you do for a client that was struggling to sleep? This may involve rearranging their room, getting them a new bed, putting on a relaxing CD, getting them a black-out blind or giving them a night-light.
Safety needs
Safety needs are associated with feeling safe, protected and secure. Safety needs often refer to order, stability, personal safety, financial safety and health and wellbeing. Whilst providing your clients with the necessary support, it is essential that these safety needs are met. Think about how you can ensure your clients’ safety
in different ways. If you’ve noticed their carpet is coming up at one of the corners and it is slowly becoming a trip hazard, you should do something about it in order to avoid an accident occurring. If you’ve noticed their stairway light bulb has popped, make sure that is replaced in order to prevent any falls due to bad lighting. Think about a client that feels unsafe in their home; by installing a new alarm system, you can ensure that they do feel safe.
Social needs
Social needs are related to relationships and peoples’ needs for love and affection. This can include companionship and the relationships with friends and family. It is associated with a sense of belonging and a need for affection and intimacy. Social needs are also related to interactions and can be met through pleasing and fulfilling relationships with others. Think about the different ways that you can ensure your support can meet these needs for your clients and avoid them becoming lonely. For example, taking the time to have a meaningful conversation with them when you see them can be enough to meet their needs. You may find that, for other clients, they need more interaction. So, in order to meet their social needs, you may need to get them involved in activities in which they can interact with others. Perhaps there’s a weekly choir group, a book club or an evening dance class that they could go to in order to satisfy their social needs.
Esteem needs
Esteem needs are needs that are associated with respecting yourself and feeling respected by others. It’s about developing positive feelings of self-worth and self-esteem and having pride and confidence in you as an individual. People need to feel accepted and valued by others; they need attention and recognition from others and need to feel a sense of contribution. It is also related to freedom, independence and strength, all of which will be discussed in detail later in the unit. For now, think about how you can meet a client’s esteem needs. This can involve recognising and accepting their values and beliefs and encouraging them to set small, achievable goals.
Need for self-actualisation
Self-actualisation is about personal growth and is related to realising and fulfilling your potential. It’s about finding a meaning to life that is important to you and accomplishing everything that you can. It’s about becoming the most you possibly can be. In order to ensure your clients’ needs for self- actualisation are met, you should focus on their strengths and possibilities, rather than problems. It’s about providing them with a sense of direction and supporting them achieve what they can. Even if this is as simple as getting out of bed themselves; this can be a real achievement for someone relying on your care and support. Your support activities should be based around your clients’ strengths and should work towards encouraging them to be as independent as possible.
As you can see, Maslow’s hierarchy of needs is a good place to start when you are considering the ways in which you can meet your clients’ needs. There are other needs that Maslow doesn’t touch on that you should also take into consideration. For example, you will also need to consider your clients’ spiritual, cultural and sexual needs.
Spiritual needs can be associated with the need to feel that there is a greater power or being in order to find a meaning or purpose in life. These needs are complex, abstract, intangible and more difficult to measure. It is essential that you acknowledge and support these spiritual needs whilst providing your clients with the relevant care and support. This will involve listening to their concerns and empathising with them and can often lead to you giving them hope. Spiritual needs can be important in end-of-life care and can help a client prepare for death and dying.
Cultural needs are associated with a client’s need to have their culture acknowledged, accepted and respected in all aspects of their care and support. It can involve encouraging them to express their culture in the clothes that they wear, the food that they eat and the ceremonies that they participate in. It could also involve taking the time to learn about their culture and the different ways you can respect it. For example, is there a specific way you should address them? Is there a specific time that they need to pray? Should you remove your shoes if visiting their home?
Sexual needs stem from Maslow’s social needs and relate to the need for love, affection and intimacy. They can be difficult to address within a care and
support setting. In order to help your clients meet these needs, you could give sexual health advice, encourage them to express their sexuality and offer the necessary support. Remember that each client should be allowed to make their own choices and have these choices supported.
It essential that you understand your clients’ needs to ensure they receive the appropriate support. As well as their individual needs, you should consider your clients’ stage of life and development too.
Stages of life and development
As well as considering a client’s individual needs when engaging in support activities, you will need to consider the particular stage that they are in their life and development. Throughout our lives, we go through various stages of development. It is essential to understand how people grow, develop and adapt at different life stages. This can then be applied within the support activities that you engage in to ensure that they are suitable for that particular client.
There are 10 life stages:
1. Infant (0-2 years) – dependent
2. Child (3-9 years) – growing, mastering skills, learning to play and socialise
3. Adolescent (10-19 years) – growing, puberty, hormones and emotions
4. Young adult (20-29 years) – finishing education, starting career and family
5. Adult (30-39 years) – managing family and career
6. Middle age (40-60 years) – first signs of ageing
7. Independent elder (60+ years) – more signs of ageing, retirement and health problems
8. Vulnerable elder – elders requiring some assistance due to cognitive/health problems
9. Dependent elder – unable to perform personal functions and requires daily care
10. End of life – preparing for death/dying and may require full-on care.
Before engaging in support activities with your clients, you should ensure that you understand what stage they are at in their life. This will help you to ensure that your support is appropriate and compliments their current stage of life and development.
For example, a client at the last stage of their life (death and
dying) will require different support activities than a client at an earlier stage of their life. The last stage
of a client’s life can be stressful, and it is essential that you support your client in a way that can make the concept of dying as stress-free as possible.
A client that is in the last stage of their life may lose their interest in food and drink. So, rather than forcing them to eat and drink, you would need to support them in another way to ensure that they don’t experience pain or discomfort. This may involve refraining from giving them food or drink (unless they request it), wetting their lips and mouth every now and then with a small amount of water or a small sponge dipped in water or applying a lip balm to protect their lips from dryness.
Activity 1C
1.4 – Recognise, respect and accommodate the person’s expressions of identity and sexuality as appropriate in the context of their age or stage of life
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Describe a range of methods to accommodate a person’s expressions of identity
⮚ Outline potential awkwardness of discussing sexuality and methods to deal with this
⮚ Handle interactions respectfully and appropriately according to the specific situation.
Expressions of identity
It is important to allow clients to express their identity; you need to recognise, respect and accommodate these expressions. Refer back to Chapter 1.2 to recap on the different ways that you can support your clients in expressing their identity. A client should be allowed to be themselves; you should respect this and accommodate it, if necessary.
For example:
⮚ If a client is out-going, loud and friendly, they should be free to do so and now be told to ‘shush’ or ‘be quiet’
⮚ If a client is quiet, shy and reserved, this should be respected, and they should not be forced to talk to someone or about something if they don’t feel comfortable doing so
⮚ If a client is an extrovert and likes being around others, they should be encouraged to do so by joining groups and meeting new people
⮚ If a client likes to be alone, they shouldn’t be forced to participate in group activities if they don’t want to – they would be happier in their own space doing their own thing.
Expressions of sexuality
Along with expressing their identity, your clients should feel as though they can express their sexuality too.
Expressions of sexuality may include:
⮚ Access to assistive/protective devices
⮚ Love and affection
⮚ Need for privacy and discretion
⮚ Physical appearance
⮚ Touch.
You should ensure that your clients have the freedom to express their sexuality without the fear of prejudice or discrimination. To suppress a client’s need to express their sexuality could lead to further health issues, isolation and depression.
The effects of suppression may include:
⮚ Depression
⮚ Frustration
⮚ Anger or violence
⮚ Social withdrawal.
Allow the client to open up and talk to you, especially if they have been forced to suppress or hide their feelings in the past. Your client may have grown up in a very suppressive household where they were not allowed to express that they were in fact, homosexual. You may find that a lot of elderly clients grew up whilst homosexuality was either frowned upon or even illegal. Some homosexuals would marry a person of the opposite sex to try and change their feelings or hide how they truly felt. The client might now be at a time when they can be open and express their feelings without any fear. By giving your clients the chance to express their sexuality, you may be able to make them calmer and increase their happiness and comfort.
Different clients will express their sexuality in different ways, so do not be surprised if some are more open than others because of their personality, culture and/or upbringing. Some cultures are much more open than others, whereas some will prefer not to discuss the matter,
especially if they are religious and their beliefs actually frown upon certain behaviours. It’s about letting them know that you are willing to listen to and support them regardless of their sexuality. Making sexuality a taboo subject may discourage and dishearten your clients. The previous chapter highlighted the sexual needs of clients, demonstrating the importance to facilitate in the discussion and expression of it.
Whether you are respecting or accommodating a client’s expression of their identity or their sexuality, you should do so in a way that is appropriate to them as an individual, their age and the stage that they are at within their life.
Activity 1D
1.5 – Promote and facilitate opportunities for participation in activities that reflect the person’s individual physical, social, cultural and spiritual needs
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ List a variety of examples of different activities that can reflect a person’s physical, social, cultural and spiritual needs
⮚ Make relevant suggestions given individual’s information and outline what is necessary to promote and facilitate these opportunities.
Activities that reflect clients’ individual needs
Part of your role includes promoting and facilitating opportunities for your clients to participate in activities. It is important that these activities reflect your clients’ individual physical, social, cultural and spiritual needs.
Physical needs
Activities that would reflect clients’ physical needs may include:
⮚ Educational workshops about nutrition and a healthy lifestyle
⮚ Cooking workshops and shopping trips to promote good, healthy eating
⮚ Walks in the countryside get your client moving (also increases natural light exposure)
⮚ Swimming is a good way to ensure clients exercise (exercise can increase sleep quality)
⮚ Yoga lessons (or deep breathing techniques) can help clients sleep better
⮚ A client that is recovering from an operation could do gentle stretches daily.
The key to encouraging your clients to participate in activities that reflect their physical needs is to consider them as an individual.
What works for one client may not work for another. In order to ensure they get enough exercise, you may need to find something that they enjoy doing. One client may like walks in the countryside; another may enjoy swimming, and another may enjoy weekly dance lessons.
Social needs
In order to meet clients’ social needs, you may need to encourage them to participate in group activities in which they can interact with others, for example:
⮚ Book club
⮚ Choir
⮚ Chess club
⮚ Weekends away
⮚ Bingo nights
⮚ Dance lessons
⮚ Arts and crafts groups
⮚ Coffee mornings
⮚ Luncheons
⮚ Day trips.
As with any other activities, activities that reflect a client’s social needs should depend on them as an individual. One client will have different social needs compared to another client. One client will need to participate in activities like the ones discussed above. What about the clients that don’t really like group activities? How could you ensure their social needs were met? You could ensure that someone pops in for a conversation daily, you could encourage them to make phone calls to friends and family, or you could arrange for them to get a ‘pen pal’. A ‘pen pal’ would give them an opportunity to get to know someone new, develop a friendship and satisfy their social needs, without having to feel uncomfortable in a group setting.
Cultural and spiritual needs
Activities that would reflect clients’ cultural and spiritual needs may include:
⮚ Visiting their place of worship
⮚ Attending relevant celebrations
⮚ Visits from spiritual leaders
⮚ Maintaining existing religious networks (e.g. meeting up or talking over the phone)
⮚ Reading books/watching television in their preferred language.
What should you do if there aren’t relevant or appropriate activities for your clients to participate in? If your client wishes to participate in a dance class and there isn’t one currently running, you could look into putting one together. This would involve doing a bit of research and ensuring that there are others that would want to take part. If there isn’t a healthy eating workshop currently running, think of how you could teach your clients about nutrition and a healthy lifestyle in order to meet their needs.
Activity 1E

1. Define the terms below and give an example of each: 
-Social differences      
-Cultural differences     
-Spiritual differences.
*
2. How could you respect these differences when providing them with care and support? (Maximum 100 words)
*
3. Summarise your own values and attitudes (maximum 150 words)
*
4. Using information gathered from Activities 1A and 1B, outline the person’s individual needs, their stage of life and development and their strengths. Give three considerations when engaging in support activities.
*
5. Give four examples of the different ways you can accommodate your clients’ expressions of their identity.
*
6. An older gentleman you have been supporting has come to you to express his sexuality. He hasn’t told his family or friends that he is homosexual but feels like now is the right time. How will you handle this situation appropriately and respectfully?
*
7. Give five examples of different activities that can reflect a person’s physical needs.
*
8. Give five examples of different activities that can reflect a person’s social needs.
*
9. Give five examples of different activities that can reflect a person’s cultural and spiritual needs.