Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to work in partnership with older people and their carers to implement interventions in the context of an individualised plan to reduce risk.
This unit applies to support workers in a residential or community context. Work performed requires a range of well developed skills where some discretion and judgement is required. Workers will take responsibility for their own outputs under direct or indirect supervision.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Sector
N/A
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
1. Assist with the preparation for a risk assessment
1.1 Confirm assessment requirements with supervisor or relevant health professional
1.2 Encourage participation of the older person and their carer in assessment and further actions
1.3 Provide information to the older person and/or carer to clarify own role, responsibilities and accountability
1.4 Provide information to the older person and/or carer explaining the assessment process, including explanation of results
1.5 Communicate in a supportive and encouraging manner that is respectful of the older person and carer’s, rights, level of understanding and cultural background
1.6 Seek older person’s permission and cooperation in the assessment process
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (such as language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills) that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Assisted with the assessment of risk and the implementation and evaluation of risk minimisation strategies for at least 2 older people, 1 in a simulated environment and 1 in the workplace, in a manner that is respectful of the older person’s dignity and privacy.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ The tensions which may exist between an individual’s rights and the organisation’s responsibility to individuals
⮚ Legal and ethical considerations for working in aged care:
o duty of care
o human rights
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations
⮚ The major issues, trends and policies relating to the health and wellbeing of older people
⮚ Standardised tools for risk assessment and the management and monitoring of risks
⮚ Major risk areas for ageing population:
o depression and anxiety
o isolation
o abuse (sexual, emotional, physical, financial, system)
o falls
o medication
o dehydration and malnutrition
o dysphagia
o continence
⮚ Documentation requirements including the importance of accurate and appropriately detailed records.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in an ageing support workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. These are situations relating to emergency or unplanned procedures where assessment in these circumstances would be unsafe, impractical or threatens the dignity of the older person.
The following conditions must be met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including relevant assessment tools.
Overall, assessment must involve some real interactions with older people, colleagues, families/carers and the use of individualised plans.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - http://www.cshisc.com.au
1. Assist with the preparation for a risk assessment
1.1.  Confirm assessment requirements with supervisor or relevant health professional
1.2.  Encourage participation of the older person and their carer in assessment and further actions
1.3.  Provide information to the older person and/or carer to clarify own role, responsibilities and accountability
1.4.  Provide information to the older person and/or carer explaining the assessment process, including explanation of results
1.5.  Communicate in a supportive and encouraging manner that is respectful of the older person and carer’s, rights, level of understanding and cultural background
1.6.  Seek older person’s permission and cooperation in the assessment process
1.1 – Confirm assessment requirements with supervisor or relevant health professional
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify the relevant supervisor(s) and/or health professional(s) from whom they should seek confirmation of assessment requirements
⮚ Seek confirmation of assessment requirements from supervisor or relevant health professional.
Providing a service
Interventions may be required for older people with health or care concerns. They ensure that the correct measures are taken to maintain health and wellbeing in an environment that is supportive to the older person and their family and/or carer(s).
When working within the health and care industry for older people, a full assessment of their support requirements will be needed. This may be carried out by a government ACAT team (Aged Care Assessment Team) or by an independent service provider.
This will determine if health and care intervention is required and to what extent. Assessments should be made periodically to check that health and care needs are always met.
An assessment provides understanding of an older person’s current health, how situations are being managed, and how to identify and determine all future wellbeing needs. From this, the appropriate care and welfare solutions can be identified, and any risks to health can be recognised and managed.
You will need to know:
⮚ Their physical and mental condition
⮚ Any diagnosed conditions
⮚ Any medical needs including medication and/or treatments
⮚ Functioning requirements
⮚ The lifestyle of the older person
⮚ If they have a carer (or carers) and/or dependants.
At your place of work, make sure that all assessment requirements are understood and confirmed with your supervisor/appropriate health professional. You will need to have the correct, relevant client information to hand, such as health and care records.
The older person may have specific physical needs such as poor mobility or a debilitating health condition, or they may have mental health problems. Knowing what you are assessing for is paramount to delivering the right care and for assessing the associated risks.
Assessing a client
An assessment includes:
⮚ Identifying and diagnosing conditions, including complex care needs and dual diagnosis
⮚ Both medical and functioning requirements of the older person
⮚ Performing a person-centred approach to care needs
⮚ Recognising potential risks and hazards for the older person.
A risk assessment should look at all potential situations that may cause harm to the older person, for example, if the older person is at home on their own for long periods of time. From this recognition of risk, the hazards may include an increased chance in falls occurring, poor nutrition if the older person is unable to prepare and cook food and personal hygiene needs.
Confirming requirements
Assessment requirements should be confirmed with a supervisor, or a relevant health professional. Assessment requirements may vary according to the specific needs of the client and the services for which they are eligible.
Relevant health professionals may include:
⮚ Doctor
⮚ Dietician
⮚ Diversional therapist
⮚ Drug and alcohol worker
⮚ Geriatrician
⮚ Home care worker
⮚ In-home respite worker
⮚ Nursing assistant
⮚ Pain specialist
⮚ Palliative care specialist
⮚ Psychiatrist
⮚ Psychologist
⮚ Registered nurse
⮚ Wound consultant.
Ensure that you are familiar with the procedure for confirming assessment requirements within your own organisation, including the identity of the relevant supervisor(s) and/or health professional(s).
Activity 1A
1.2 – Encourage participation of the older person and their carer in assessment and further actions
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Take a person-centred approach to assessment by encouraging the participation of the older person and the carer. This may involve:
o discussing personal preferences and requirements
o answering client and carer questions about the assessment process
o confirming with client and/or carer that information is accurate
o obtaining consent for examination, treatment or collaboration from the client.
Participation in care requirements
To achieve the correct assessment for care, you should ensure that the older person and their carer (if applicable) participate in this process.
This will provide:
⮚ Accurate accounts and information on the older person’s situation
⮚ Answers to questions you have on health and care issues for the older person
⮚ Recognition of risks and associated hazards
⮚ Development of a person-centred approach to care
⮚ Individual needs to be recognised and taken into consideration
⮚ Honest and open discussions on preferences and meeting health and care needs.
By making decisions on health and care needs with the older person and their carer(s), you can develop care that is both beneficial and will integrate into existing routines.
Encourage participation through friendly communications that are warm, honest and sincere. Establish a rapport with the client (older person) and their carer and include them in the development of their support needs. This will help you to build upon trust and to develop a working relationship with the client and carer and will promote joint responsibility.
Determining actions
From working together for the assessment and with other medical and health professionals look to establish the actions that should be taken to ensure optimum health and quality of life is made and maintained.
Actions may include:
⮚ Medical treatments and visits/appointments
⮚ Adjustments to the environment to remove risks to the older person, such as:
o ensuring flooring is non-slip and has no trip hazards
o handrails and/or walkways (if needed)
o rearrangements to room layouts
⮚ Supporting care, including:
o daily activities
o personal care routines
o meal provisions
o administering medications and dressing wounds
o assistance with shopping
o assistance with living requirements such as paying bills
o social/leisure activities
o respite care needs.
A person-centred approach
A person-centred approach to care is when the older person/client is included in the processes, decisions and considerations that are being made for their own care needs. The older person working together with the organisation/support worker to help the process of assessment
and any subsequent health and care needs. It is looking at the person as an individual and understanding that they are able to make choices that are in their best interest.
A person-centred approach may involve:
⮚ Putting people and carers at the centre of service delivery
⮚ Including people in decision-making relating to their care
⮚ Involving people in discussions about service delivery options and issues
⮚ Obtaining the person's consent to examine, treat or work with them
⮚ Effective customer service
⮚ Listening to and addressing complaints within scope of own work role.
Activity 1B
1.3 – Provide information to the older person and/or carer to clarify own role, responsibilities and accountability
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Clarify and communicate own role to the older person, including the provision of information about own responsibility and accountability
⮚ Communicate information about duty of care requirements
⮚ Communicate information about client confidentiality.
Clarifying your role
As part of your working requirements, you should clarify your role within aged care to those you work with. This will make others aware of your level of involvement and professional capacity.
Clarifying your role includes:
⮚ Defining your responsibilities to others
⮚ Providing understanding on your accountability
⮚ Communicating how you can support those under your care.
Make certain that the people you work with, and for, have the correct understanding on your involvement. If you are unsure on any part of your role, you should speak with your manager to clarify this. By informing the older person and any others on your work role, you can ensure that all parties have the same understanding and can help prevent errors occurring.
Your role will include ethical, legal and adherence to organisational policy and procedures.
Duty of care
Duty of care is a legal duty to take all reasonable care to avoid others being harmed and to ensure that all health and community workers provide a good standard of care, with due attention. This involves the application of and adherence to ethical standards and acknowledges that people have a right to be cared for in safe environments which are free from neglect and abuse. It also involves identifying risks and responding in the most appropriate way. It does not require perfection; moreover, it is the effort to ensure that the person is protected. It acknowledges that you may lack resources and abilities that would enable said perfection.
Reasonable care includes considering the safety, privacy, confidentiality and needs of clients and others. In the aged care industry, other responsibilities may include management of the client’s benefits and always the prevention of age discrimination. In instances where the health and care of children are concerned, all children should be protected against risk factors to their health and wellbeing. Be aware of any circumstances that may cause concern and seek advice.
Everyone has a duty of care responsibility – for example, the employer and employees are both responsible for safety in the workplace. When working with disabled people, this applies in potentially risky situations, where duty of care will need to be exercised to ensure hazard prevention.
You must ensure that all of your work meets the duty of care requirements. Policies and procedures which take into account things like WHS and legal responsibilities should be followed. A WHS officer should be appointed to ensure all workers and people in the vicinity of work comply with these requirements.
Employers have a duty of care to provide a safe work place and systems of work in consultation with their team and to keep their team informed about changes in WHS legislation. To assist you in ensuring that your organisation is compliant with WHS legislation, you can download a copy of the WHS Compliance Self-Assessment from the Safety at Work process. You should also check the specific legislation, codes of practice and standards that apply in your location to ensure compliance at work.
The objective of the WHS Act is to ensure that a safe workplace is created free from risk or illness or injury. For that end, compliance must be demonstrated in regards to:
⮚ A safety management system
⮚ Responsibilities and Accountabilities
⮚ Consultation
⮚ Risk management
⮚ Information, instructions and training
⮚ Managing injuries
⮚ Record keeping
⮚ Monitoring, review and improvement
⮚ Resource management
⮚ Corporate risk.
If you are able to work through the document and tick yes the whole way through, then you are complying with current legislation. Care should be taken; this is not a one off process. Managers are required to ensure the continuous compliance with the legislative system.
Duty of care in law
Duty of care comes under the ruling of tort law i.e. a civil wrong as opposed to a breach of contract. It requires an individual to provide a standard of reasonable care while carrying out any activity that could potentially harm others. Breaching duty of care means that you, as an individual, are liable to legal action from the claimant.
Duty of care has been developed through common law i.e. it exists based on past related court rulings – therefore, there is no exact legal definition of things like duty of care and negligence.
Negligence is when damage/harm occurs to another person as a result of someone else not exercising reasonable care. Duty of care requires that an acceptable standard of care is exercised, where it is reasonably practicable, to ensure the health and safety of yourself and others.
Duty of care also means that everyone has a responsibility to ensure a safe and healthy working environment.
This can include the following people:
⮚ Community and disability service workers
⮚ Doctors
⮚ Solicitors
⮚ Financial advisors
⮚ Drivers
⮚ Local governments.
Duty of care is written legally into the Workplace Health and Safety Act 1995 – it is a moral duty to anticipate possible hazards and causes of injury and do everything reasonably practicable to prevent/remove/minimise these causes.
This means that duty of care cannot be delegated – all adults in the workplace are responsible for health and safety.
Courts will determine breaches of duty of care based on the following criteria:
⮚ What is typically expected of another person in the same situation
⮚ The person's roles and responsibilities within their organisation
⮚ The experience/level of training for the individual
⮚ The practicalities of the situation
⮚ What is deemed acceptable practice within the community
⮚ Generally acceptable standards in the situation
⮚ Relevant laws e.g. the Workplace Health and Safety Acts, Regulations and Codes of Practice.
For negligence to be successful, the following must be proven:
⮚ A duty of care is owed by the plaintiff to the defendant
⮚ In exercising the duty of care, the defendant failed to function according to a reasonable standard of care
⮚ The failure to function according to a reasonable standard of care (breach) caused the damage suffered by the plaintiff
⮚ The loss or damage suffered by the plaintiff was reasonably foreseeable.
Negligence laws
In order to restrict the number of negligence claims, there are laws in place; in Queensland laws related to professional liability for damages related to negligence:
⮚ Personal Injuries Proceedings Act 2002 (Qld)
⮚ Civil Liability Act 2003 (Qld).
The following principles apply to negligence:
⮚ It does not apply if the risk of the activity was obvious/made clear
⮚ What is expected is dependent on the skill level/experience of the worker
⮚ People are given a reasonable amount of information to make informed decisions on optional actions (e.g. medical treatment)
⮚ Apologies/expressions of regret do not amount to admitting liability/fault and will hold no weight in court
⮚ First aid personnel have no liability in emergency situations, as long as their actions are in good faith and without reckless disregard for safety.
Confidentiality
Confidentiality is required by law in certain respects; the privacy of patient and client records is the most important aspect of confidentiality in the care industry. Failure to maintain privacy of customer records is punishable by law and organisations can be sued by the patient. This would mean not sharing certain information in your communications, such as networking. Information cannot be disclosed to those not directly involved in the patient’s/client's case. Measure should be implemented within your workplace and you will probably find that your organisation already has certain policies and procedures in place.
The only situation where this private information can be disclosed is when there is a serious threat or risk of injury to the client or others. Other than that, the patient/client may choose to disclose their information – but it is their choice only.
Clients will need to give permission (normally in writing) for their information to be released to others; if they are unable to do this through disability or death, advocates can grant permission.
Client records
Clients also have a right to view their records – this information should be supplied only by
authorised personnel in that field. If access is denied the client should be informed why and given details of when the decision can be reviewed. Any comments they make should be attached to their notes in an addendum.
There should be policies in place to deal with workers who breach confidentiality – these will depend on your specific industry. Breaching confidentiality can, however, give clients a right to open legal action against you and if the individual or organisation is found responsible, accreditation and awards could be removed from the culprit.
Staff must be versed in all confidentiality legislation, organisational policies and which information should be treated as confidential. They need to know the policies and procedures for every possible situation, so regular training is essential.
Confidentiality covers:
⮚ Physical privacy of patients in facilities, such as surgeries, hospitals and residential care homes
⮚ Controlling/not sharing records
⮚ Monitoring access to records
⮚ Disclosure to third parties, such as employers, other patients, family members, insurance companies
⮚ Use of audit trails to monitor who has accessed records and when
⮚ Encrypting electronic records
⮚ Protection of Personally Controlled Electronic Health Records (PCEHR)
⮚ Not selling or communicating data to other companies.
These are examples; as a rule, any information relating to the patient/client, in terms of:
⮚ Medical records
⮚ Financial information
⮚ Personal details.
These should all be treated as sensitive information and be treated accordingly. Privacy is governed by the Privacy Act 1988, which regulates the handling of personal information.
Organisations usually have their own measures and control procedures in place regarding confidentiality, which will operate within the requirements of the law.
Other legislation that may impact upon your work role includes:
⮚ Aged Care Act 1997
⮚ Aged Care (Transitional Provisions) Act 1997
⮚ Aged Care (Accommodation Payment Security) Act 2006
⮚ Australian Aged Care Quality Agency Act 2013
⮚ Age Discrimination Act 2004.
Activity 1C
1.4 – Provide information to the older person and/or carer explaining the assessment process, including explanation of results
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Provide supporting written information.
Activity 1E
1.6 – Seek older person’s permission and cooperation in the assessment process
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Seek permission from the older person to conduct an assessment and to complete any other processes that require their informed consent, e.g. sharing their medical information
⮚ Follow organisational policy and procedure for seeking permission and cooperation from an older person.
Seek permission first
You should always seek the permission and cooperation of the older person when performing an assessment, and on the parts of the assessment that require their participation and decision-making.
For example, you may have to seek permission from an older person to:
⮚ Conduct an assessment
⮚ Share information with their doctor or other healthcare professional
⮚ Obtain information from their doctor or other healthcare professional.
An older person may find an assessment a difficult process as it will highlight their current health situation and any other issues surrounding their care needs. It can also show areas of concern that may not have not been previously addressed or even recognised. The older person will need to be ready for this process and may need time and information on this before they are ready to give their agreement and cooperation. As such, you should look to provide support and show compassion and understanding in your communications; never force a decision to be made.
An assessment can change how the older person perceives their health and life. Although an assessment will work towards ensuring the best care and health management is made, this can still be a daunting process.
Always follow your organisational policy and procedures when seeking permission, your organisation will have policy in place for the procedures you need to follow. Policy will be developed to ensure that codes of conduct, industry standards and legislation are followed; this will protect you, the older person
and their carer(s). Relevant legislation includes data privacy, confidentiality, anti-discrimination and human rights.
Human rights
Older people should not have their human rights or dignity taken away from them. The Australian Human Rights Commission has a responsibility under the Australian Human Rights Commission Act 1986, Age Discrimination Act 2004, Disability Discrimination Act 1992, Racial Discrimination Act 1975 and the Sex Discrimination Act 1984 to investigate complaints of alleged discrimination and breaches of human rights.
Human rights relevant to older people include:


questions:
1. What does a risk assessment do?
*
2. Name six different types of health professionals that you might need to confer with for the care of an older person.
*
3.What will an assessment process include?
*
4. Name three rights that clients have which may cause tensions when providing health and care services.
*
5. Explain how you would seek permission and cooperation from an older person in an assessment process.
*
6. Under the Australian Human Rights Commission Act 1986, what rights can help older people in care?

