Unit of Competency
Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to work in partnership with older people and their carers to implement interventions in the context of an individualised plan to reduce risk.
This unit applies to support workers in a residential or community context. Work performed requires a range of well developed skills where some discretion and judgement is required. Workers will take responsibility for their own outputs under direct or indirect supervision.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Sector
N/A
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
2. Contribute to the identification of risks
2.1 Identify and review factors in the older person’s lifestyle that might affect their level of risk
2.2 Use appropriate tools and methodologies, within scope of role, to determine risk based on physical indicators presented by the older person
2.3 Assist with risk assessment ensuring to minimise unnecessary discomfort to the older person and maximises their participation
2.4 Use the support of carers to identify risks
2.5 Recognise the older person’s risk factors based on medical history, measurements and findings, in collaboration with supervisor and/or relevant health professional
2.6 Identify the older person’s needs, issues and concerns outside scope of own practice and refer to appropriate supervisor and/or health professional
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (such as language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills) that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Assisted with the assessment of risk and the implementation and evaluation of risk minimisation strategies for at least 2 older people, 1 in a simulated environment and 1 in the workplace, in a manner that is respectful of the older person’s dignity and privacy.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ The tensions which may exist between an individual’s rights and the organisation’s responsibility to individuals
⮚ Legal and ethical considerations for working in aged care:
o duty of care
o human rights
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations
⮚ The major issues, trends and policies relating to the health and wellbeing of older people
⮚ Standardised tools for risk assessment and the management and monitoring of risks
⮚ Major risk areas for ageing population:
o depression and anxiety
o isolation
o abuse (sexual, emotional, physical, financial, system)
o falls
o medication
o dehydration and malnutrition
o dysphagia
o continence
⮚ Documentation requirements including the importance of accurate and appropriately detailed records.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in an ageing support workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. These are situations relating to emergency or unplanned procedures
where assessment in these circumstances would be unsafe, impractical or threatens the dignity of the older person.
The following conditions must be met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including relevant assessment tools.
Overall, assessment must involve some real interactions with older people, colleagues, families/carers and the use of individualised plans.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - http://www.cshisc.com.au
2. Contribute to the identification of risks
2.1.  Identify and review factors in the older person’s lifestyle that might affect their level of risk
2.2.  Use appropriate tools and methodologies, within scope of role, to determine risk based on physical indicators presented by the older person
2.3.  Assist with risk assessment ensuring to minimise unnecessary discomfort to the older person and maximises their participation
2.4. Use the support of carers to identify risks
2.5.  Recognise the older person’s risk factors based on medical history, measurements and findings, in collaboration with supervisor and/or relevant health professional
2.6.  Identify the older person’s needs, issues and concerns outside scope of own practice and refer to appropriate supervisor and/or health professional
2.1 – Identify and review factors in the older person’s lifestyle that might affect their level of risk
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Recognise and identify a range of risk factors in an older person’s lifestyle and environment.
Looking at risks
As a person gets older, or their condition changes or worsens, additional health and care requirements may be needed. A person’s lifestyle in their younger years may not be conducive to a healthy lifestyle in their older years.
It is beneficial to identify and take measures to avoid all risks that can have an adverse effect on an older person’s health and wellbeing. Review the older person’s situation and check if their current lifestyle is detrimental to maintaining health.
Lifestyle factors may include:
⮚ Excessive drinking and/or smoking
⮚ High sugar diet
⮚ Limited or no exercise taken
⮚ Too much exposure to the sun.
Lifestyle diseases can result from poor lifestyle choices; these include obesity, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, which can in turn lead to conditions such as hypertension strokes and heart attacks. There are also other risks to the health and wellbeing of older people who receive care in residential care homes and in their own home; some of these can be seen below.
Major issues
There are many major issues that facing elderly people today. As well as the implications for physical and mental health that come with aging, the aged population is also faced with issues relating to lack of suitable housing in the private sector for the aged, social exclusion, abuse and ageism, as well as many others.
Some of these issues are being combatted through the use of targeted policies, such as the Age Discrimination Act 2004.
Risks for older people
Depression and anxiety
Older people may suffer from depression or anxiety through a change in circumstances or lifestyle, for example, retirement, health problems or bereavement of a person close to them. As an older person, they may feel that isolation from others and an inability to connect with modern society is an issue. This can prevent older people from maintaining a normal life.
Symptoms include:
⮚ Sadness
⮚ Fatigue
⮚ Loss of interest in hobbies or pastimes previously undertaken
⮚ Social withdrawal/isolation
⮚ Loss of appetite/weight loss
⮚ Problems with sleeping (e.g. loss or increase in sleep or change in sleep pattern).
Assessment options include:
⮚ Asking questions to assess the individual’s state of mind
⮚ Using a checklist of statements with individuals, these indicate levels of wellbeing (Geriatric depression scale or a distress thermometer).
Treatment can include therapy, such as cognitive behaviour therapy and behaviour therapy, making lifestyle changes or through medication.
Isolation
This may occur to older people who have lost touch with friends and colleagues or have experienced the loss of a family member (or members). Increasingly an older person may lose contact with others due to mobility or health issues, or with a decrease in involvement within the community and in their options for social interactions.
Similar to depression or anxiety, symptoms may include sadness, lack of energy and withdrawal from society. The individual may also experience a loss of confidence in participating in interactions with others or low self-esteem. By encouraging the older person to join appropriate social or community groups, or actively seeking to make social arrangements, you can help an individual to prevent isolation as a long-term problem.
Abuse (sexual, emotional, physical, financial, system)
Elderly abuse is defined as any instance where someone takes advantage of an elderly person, or does something against their will. All forms of abuse should be recognised for what they are and never used on any individual.
This can include:
⮚ Sexual abuse – contact with an older person without their consent which may be a physical sex act or making them watch sex acts, pornography or forcing them to undress
⮚ Emotional abuse – causing distress or emotional pain, also known as psychological abuse, such as threats, intimidation, social isolation or ignoring the individual
⮚ Physical abuse – the use of force on a person to control, cause pain, injury or disability and includes violent assaults and restraint
⮚ Financial abuse – using an older person’s money/assets without their knowledge or consent and may include stealing money, forging credit cards/cheques/accounts, forging the older person’s signature, identity theft and investment fraud
⮚ System abuse – this is abuse of the system that is in place to care for the older person, this may include overcharging for services, charging for care not provided, over/under medicating and Medicare fraud.
Signs of abuse may include:
⮚ Sexual abuse:
o bruises around genitals
o unexplained genital infections or STDs
o unexplained vaginal/anal bleeding
o torn/stained clothing
⮚ Emotional abuse:
o experience of threatening, bullying or controlling behaviour from caregiver
o dementia-like behaviour from elder – rocking, mumbling, sucking thumb
⮚ Physical abuse:
o unexplained injuries
Falls
o broken bones/sprains/dislocations
o medication irregularities
o broken glasses
o signs of restraint
o caregiver refuses to let elder be seen alone
⮚ Financial abuse:
o unexplained withdrawals from elder's accounts
o sudden changes in financial situation
o missing items/cash from the elder's house
o suspicious will/policy/power of attorney changes
o addition of names of documents
o unpaid bills/lack of medical care (despite a healthy financial situation)
o financial activity taking place when the older person is incapacitated
o unnecessary services being provided
⮚ System abuse:
o duplicate medical bills
o evidence of over/under-medication
o evidence of inadequate care pertaining to the amount paid
o problems in the care facility.
With age, falls can become an increasing problem due to a lack of mobility or through other health conditions that may make you prone to a fall. As an older person, the ability to bounce back without injury diminishes; you may break bones or damage tendons and muscles as a consequence from a fall which either take longer to heal or require further medical treatment to correct.
To reduce the risk of a fall:
⮚ Eat healthily and drink enough fluids to keep well and hydrated
⮚ Take part in gentle exercise to help maintain flexibility and muscle strength
⮚ Wear comfortable footwear that fit well, offer protection and have grip
⮚ Ensure the home/care environment is hazard free, e.g. flooring is trip-free and spills are wiped up straight away
⮚ Keep lighting at adequate levels, especially during the night
⮚ Install safety aids, e.g. hand rails and an emergency alarm.
Medication
In the care of older people, administering the correct doses and types of medication (as needed for the care of an individual) is essential. Medical assessments should be carried out periodically to check that the medication is working as required, is at the correct dosage and that the older person receiving this is not suffering from side effects that are new or unknown to the medical specialist/doctor.
It is not uncommon for older people to be on a combination of drugs for different ailments and it is vital that all instructions are followed when taking medication. There may be a required order of medication, and different dosages. Make sure that the older person has a careful control over taking any prescribed medication/treatments and that if help is required, that this is given.
Dehydration and malnutrition
As we get older, it becomes increasingly important to look after our bodies with the right nutrition and food types. This may be down to medical conditions or lifestyle factors.
Factors that may impede nutritional health:
⮚ Fixed income – money needs to stretch for older people in retirement or care, and cheaper, less nutritional foods, may be eaten
⮚ Residential care homes – lack of resources to provide assistance at meal times to ensure clients eat meals, to provide food that stays hot and food that is appetising for the clients to eat
⮚ Older people can lose their appetite due to mobility issues or health conditions
⮚ Medical conditions, such as dementia, prevent the older person from maintaining meal times and a balanced nutritional diet.
It is also important to ensure that the correct intake of fluids is made. Many older people may neglect or not realise the need for maintaining fluids; as we get older this is vital for maintaining kidney function and health.
Dysphagia
Dysphagia (difficulty in swallowing) is a common problem and concern for older people. This condition can occur when muscles used for swallowing become weaker with age, when
neurological damage occurs e.g. through a stroke or when suffering from dementia and with other health problems associated with the oesophagus, mouth or throat.
Symptoms include:
⮚ Food sticking in the throat
⮚ Coughing
⮚ Choking
⮚ Nasal/oral regurgitation.
Assessment options include:
⮚ Referral to speech pathologist for swallow assessment
⮚ 'Modified barium swallow'
⮚ Endoscopy
⮚ Full barium swallow (with video recording)
⮚ Manometry.
Treatments are available, such as swallowing therapy, dietary changes, feeding tubes, medication and surgery. The treatment given to the individual will be determined upon the type, severity and symptoms of dysphagia.
Continence
Issues of maintaining continence (control) with bodily functions can be a problem as we age. This could be due to other health conditions, such as urinary tract infections or when using medications; it can also be caused through a weakening of the muscles that help us to control our bladder and bowel.
Symptoms include:
⮚ Involuntary loss of urine through activities such as sneezing and coughing
⮚ A strong urge to urinate, followed by an immediate bladder contraction which causes urine to leak
⮚ Inability to empty bladder or bowels completely when using the toilet
⮚ An increased need to urinate at night
⮚ Painful urination
⮚ Blood in urine.
There may also be instances, due to the physical/mental condition of the older person, where the individual is unable to get to the toilet in time or recognise when they need to use it.
Managing incontinence may include:
⮚ Bladder or bowel re-training
⮚ Pelvic floor exercises
⮚ Prompted toileting
⮚ Timed toileting
⮚ Dietician advice with nutrition and hydration requirements.
Activity 2A
2.2 – Use appropriate tools and methodologies, within scope of role, to determine risk based on physical indicators presented by the older person
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Select and use appropriate assessment tools to determine risk
⮚ Work within their own organisation’s methodology and assessment framework to determine risk
⮚ Undertake work tasks that are only within scope of own role.
Make use of tools and methodologies
To determine any associated risks with the health and care of an older person, you should use the tools and methodologies that are available to you within your organisation to aid your assessment.
Assessment tools should be quick and easy to use, have a high useability rate throughout your organisation/care industry and have good inter-rater reliability so your professional peers will reach the same/similar results as yourself.
Assessment tools are the established set of questions, determined scales of evidence and other known information that are specific to the requirements of a particular type of assessment.
These have been developed and used to determine factors and make an understanding of a health/care issue. These can help health and care professionals in the overall assessment process and in recognising risks.
They should be used to assist you in reaching decisions, not to determine outcomes solely from their use (be mindful not to follow predetermined routes).
Tools include:
⮚ Descriptive tools
⮚ Diagnostic screening tools
⮚ Risk factor checklists
⮚ Risk prediction tools.
The Barthel Scale
An example of a complex assessment tool is the Barthel ADL Index (activities of daily living scale). This looks to determine how an older person is able to carry out daily living tasks in the
home; each task on the scale is awarded a number of points. The higher the score, the better able the older person is in maintaining their daily needs and independence. This can be used to assess an older person after a long stay in hospital or when determining if an older person is still able to look after themselves at home.
The older person is assessed on their ability to carry out daily tasks. Factors such as time to perform the tasks, plus assistance requirements, are considered and applied when points are given.
The requirements for the Barthel ADL Index include:
⮚ Determining incontinence problems
⮚ Using the toilet
⮚ Maintaining personal hygiene
⮚ Ability to cook/prepare meals
⮚ Mobility issues.
Methodology
Methodology for assessment should follow a systematic process for determining the risks and in finding ways in controlling or eliminating these. Your organisation should have systems in place for you to follow. Make sure that you follow the correct processes and complete the steps that are required of you in your work role.
Scope of role
The scope of your role refers to the pre-determined requirements of your working role; i.e. the tasks that need to be performed and have been made known to you. Agreement of these tasks and the requirements to do these should be made between you and your organisation.
Your role may also involve attending regular training sessions, as change within the health and care industry occur or to ensure that you have the necessary skills and development training. When meeting older people/clients and their family or carer(s) you will also need to maintain the professionalism of your organisation when carrying out work tasks. Being supportive, caring and compassionate should be a part of your role.
Trends and risks
Most people needing care are those of an older age (as the population lives for longer). This is a trend that has emerged within the care sector and brings demand for care within the home, support for older people and their carers, community care and residential care requirements.
The philosophy for care is to help the older person to stay in their home for as long as possible through providing a variety of health and care packages and services. This is aided by appropriate medical care and through the work of a support/care worker.
Keeping the older person within their home has proved to be beneficial to the older person’s quality of life and wellbeing. As long as the correct support is in place to allow this, this can help an older person to maintain their health and to live the lifestyle that they would like to (within the parameters of predetermined health and care needs). Those receiving care have limitations to daily living activities, assistance is required predominantly in the areas of mobility, self-care and in communicating needs.
The risks to this will be focussed upon
⮚ Environmental hazards – such as mobility issues, e.g.an inability to use stairs or steps safely or through falls; care aids and adaptive equipment may be needed in the home to assist the older person
⮚ Care hazards – such as ensuring the older person is looked after correctly, this is vital and can be managed through the help of the carer(s), friends and support services; careful assessment and monitoring will be needed, this includes:
o hygiene requirements
o nutritional needs
o medication and treatments
o social interaction/activities
⮚ Abuse – this can come from visitors to the older person, those who are appointed to help and from external influences such as cold calling; risks will need to be identified as to the potential scenarios for this to happen and managed appropriately.
Trends for care requirements in older people also include:
⮚ Complex care needs
⮚ Living with two or more conditions
⮚ Dementia care
⮚ The demand for higher quality care and services
⮚ Community care needs
⮚ More flexibility and choice in care to suit the many types of people and their specific circumstances
⮚ Marrying up potential divides in care services with those on a higher income and those on a low income.
The risks to providing care to older people will therefore be specific to the older person receiving care. Al risks should be assessed on an individual basis and managed appropriately.
Risks may include:
⮚ Isolation/being left on their own for long periods of time
⮚ Not taking prescribed medication or attending treatments as needed
⮚ Difficulty in managing dual conditions
⮚ Not being able to seek immediate help if an emergency occurs.
Carers of older people
Carers are predominantly family members; a partner or spouse will most likely be a carer to an older person. Older carers may also have health and care needs of their own, for example due to their age or through having an existing condition or disability. There is a risk that the carer’s health may deteriorate and an inability to be able to care could occur. Carers should be supported through other services such as respite care, community care and through a care/support worker.
Activity 2B
2.3 – Assist with risk assessment ensuring to minimise unnecessary discomfort to the older person and maximises their participation
2.4 – Use the support of carers to identify risks
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Complete a risk assessment using appropriate tools and methods of documentation, e.g. a risk assessment form
⮚ Encourage participation and contribution from the older person to identify their perception of their own risk
⮚ Encourage the contribution of carers to support the identification of risk factors in the lifestyle and environment of the older person.
Perform a risk assessment
The process of a risk assessment will be to look at the situation of the older person and to evaluate any risks that may arise from the health and care needs required for them. The development of an individualised care plan and its implementation will need to include the identification of risks/hazards and the preventative measures that need to be taken to control and manage these.
Risks are the danger factors that an individual is exposed to; the hazard is the consequence of a risk factor. You will need to produce a checklist of risk factors which are applicable to the older person and their situation. This is so you can systematically work through and identify the impact of each one and apply preventative measures to control these.
An example of a risk assessment form:
Potential Risk/hazar d
Who is at risk
Existing control measures taken
Risk ratin g
Preventative measures
Responsibility for measures taken
E.g. Carer suffers from epilepsy
Older person and the carer
Carer takes an Anti-epileptic drug
Low

⮚ Diabetes Type 2 (e.g. the AUSDRISK assessment tool)
⮚ Smoking/alcohol related conditions
⮚ Mental health
⮚ Cardiovascular health
⮚ Preventing falls.
Activity 2D
2.6 – Identify the older person’s needs, issues and concerns outside scope of own practice and refer to appropriate supervisor and/or health professionalx
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Evaluate needs, issues and concerns that fall outside scope of own practice and decide on most appropriate referral option
⮚ Gather and document any information necessary to make a referral.
Scope of practice
Your ‘scope of practice’ refers to the actions and procedures that you are permitted to undertake and usually refers to licensed individuals, such as nurses and paramedics. It generally refers to what you are licensed to do, though unlicensed workers also have restrictions placed on the actions they can do.
By attributing professionals with a scope of practice, you are providing them with a framework of guidelines that state what they are and are not allowed to do. This gives the individual the confidence to know their limitations and also the knowledge to avoid overstepping any boundaries. These boundaries are particularly important in the care and medical professions, as they prevent individuals attempting to tackle jobs that they are not qualified to do, which can be dangerous for all parties involved and can also mean that the individual is not insured if something goes wrong, which can leave all parties at a disadvantage.
Staff should be fully aware of their expectations and limitations and should apply this to all the work that they do; they should be ready and willing to step up to the mark and prepared to draw the line where their authority ends. If, for some reason, anyone is unsure, they should refer to their licensing and qualifications or ask a supervisor, as they will usually be informed of specific job roles and who is qualified to do what.
When any part of the older person’s health and care needs extends outside your scope of practice, check with your supervisor/identify the correct professional or service provider and refer to them in a timely fashion.
Assisting the older person
The older person may have specific needs that can only be addressed by other health professionals, you should recognise when an enquiry needs to be referred and check this with your supervisor, as needed. There may be issues or concerns that are outside of your field of knowledge or professional capacity.
Referring to other health professionals will include:
⮚ Gathering information on the need of the older person
⮚ Identifying the correct health professional/service that can assist you
⮚ Documenting and following organisational processes for logging your request
⮚ Carrying out your communications with the health professional/service.
As a support/care worker, you will not necessarily be able to address all situations or concerns that arise but you will be in a position to ascertain where you can source the right expertise.
Your role should include acquiring knowledge on the health and care options and services that are available to older people, and on the health professionals you may need to refer to.

questions:
1. Which lifestyle factors may be detrimental to the health and wellbeing of an individual (and to older people)?
*
2. Name three symptoms of depression and/or anxiety.
*
3. How would you define elderly abuse?
*
4. What types of elderly abuse may you come across? List at least three.
*
5. Name three other health risks that an older person may suffer from.
*
6. Briefly describe the tools available at your workplace to help you perform risk assessments. If not at work, research the tools that are available and briefly describe these.
*
7. Name three common trends that are present in aged care.
*
8. Provide details of when you have assisted with a risk assessment at work. Explain how this was carried out, how the older person and carer(s) were involved and how any difficulties were managed. 
*
9. How can a person’s medical history help you determine the older person’s risk factors?
*
10. How can collaborating with your supervisor and/or other health professionals on your findings and evidence assist with the risk assessment?
*
11. Define scope of practice
*
12. Give an example of where you have needed to refer to another health professional in the course of an risk assessment for an older person (or provide a simulated example). Briefly explain why you needed to refer to them and how this helped the assessment.
