The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Sector
N/A
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
3. Implement risk minimisation strategies
3.1 Identify and explain options to minimise risk to the older person and/or carer
3.2 Work with the older person and carer to identify risk minimisation strategies that are consistent with the older person’s safety needs, priorities and specific requirements
3.3 Implement strategies in a safe and effective manner that minimises the older person’s discomfort
3.4 Support carer in contributing to the implementation of strategies, where appropriate
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (such as language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills) that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Assisted with the assessment of risk and the implementation and evaluation of risk minimisation strategies for at least 2 older people, 1 in a simulated environment and 1 in the workplace, in a manner that is respectful of the older person’s dignity and privacy.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ The tensions which may exist between an individual’s rights and the organisation’s responsibility to individuals
⮚ Legal and ethical considerations for working in aged care:
o duty of care
o human rights
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations
⮚ The major issues, trends and policies relating to the health and wellbeing of older people
⮚ Standardised tools for risk assessment and the management and monitoring of risks
⮚ Major risk areas for ageing population:
o depression and anxiety
o isolation
o abuse (sexual, emotional, physical, financial, system)
o falls
o medication
o dehydration and malnutrition
o dysphagia
o continence
⮚ Documentation requirements including the importance of accurate and appropriately detailed records.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in an ageing support workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. These are situations relating to emergency or unplanned procedures where assessment in these circumstances would be unsafe, impractical or threatens the dignity of the older person.
The following conditions must be met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including relevant assessment tools.
Overall, assessment must involve some real interactions with older people, colleagues, families/carers and the use of individualised plans.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - http://www.cshisc.com.au
3. Implement risk minimisation strategies
3.1.  Identify and explain options to minimise risk to the older person and/or carer
3.2.  Work with the older person and carer to identify risk minimisation strategies that are consistent with the older person’s safety needs, priorities and specific requirements
3.3.  Implement strategies in a safe and effective manner that minimises the older person’s discomfort
3.4.  Support carer in contributing to the implementation of strategies, where appropriate
3.1 – Identify and explain options to minimise risk to the older person and/or carer
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify suitable care arrangements and/or services that will help to minimise risk to the older person
⮚ Inform the older person of the possible options in a clear and accurate manner
⮚ Produce an individualised care plan to document chosen options.
Using strategies
Strategies are the predetermined approaches used for taking actions. These approaches are identified as being the best for achieving the required results or success needed. Strategies enable you to plan and map how you will proceed; they provide focus and direction.
Your strategies will be centred on maintaining wellbeing while minimising all risks to the health and care of the older person.
Strategies may include:
⮚ Maintaining safety and wellbeing in the home
⮚ Increased social interaction for mental wellbeing
⮚ Maintaining mobility and health through gentle exercise.
Inform on the possible options
When discussing and exchanging information, you should have open body language and
use clear, accurate language. Clients and carer(s) need to know that they can trust the information you are providing them with and they also need to be clear and understand what they are being told. Your delivery of communication should be both professional and warm; those involved will be relying on your expertise and may need additional reassurance.
Exchanging information is best done face-to-face so that any misunderstandings can be dealt with and any questions can be asked but you may find that your organisation uses email, for example, as its established channel of communication, so ensure any written information is clear and concise.
Options to minimise risk may include:
⮚ Providing additional care services
⮚ Using a’ meals on wheels’ service
⮚ Visits with an occupational therapist.
As a support/care worker you can inform the older person and the carer(s) of all the options that are available to them for providing a safe and effective means of care. By talking through and identifying how risks can be minimised you can work with them to establish a safe environment.
An individualised plan
For the health and care management of an older person receiving care, an individualised care plan should be produced to detail care arrangements, how these should be carried out and by whom. They also detail the strategies that have been developed for the delivery of care, the identification of risks and how to manage these.
This plan allows a person-centred approach to be made; progress can be recorded and further assessments/evaluations can be made. This ensures that the care provided is always tailored to the individual and fulfils any changing needs.
Your plan may include:
⮚ Identification of health condition and any illnesses of the person
⮚ Healthcare needs of the individual including care, treatment and diagnostic needs
⮚ Medications, therapy or other treatments given/required
⮚ Information regarding care arrangements, i.e. if a carer looks after the person, or if other family/friends provide support, such as taking the person out on shopping trips
⮚ Information about the client’s living arrangements/needs, if employed, their financial support situation, any visitors received and lifestyle factors, such as
interests or leisure activities.
To develop a plan that is effective for an older person, recognition needs to be made on their health (both physical and mental) and consideration should be given to their routines and preferences. Identifying how the individual lives and how they may respond to suggestions on health and care support is important for choosing the correct services.
Activity 3A
3.2 – Work with the older person and carer to identify risk minimisation strategies that are consistent with the older person’s safety needs, priorities and specific requirements
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Take into account the full scope of an older person’s specific needs, priorities and requirements and use these to inform choice of risk minimisation strategy
⮚ Collaborate with the older person and/or their carer to identify the older person’s full scope of needs and suitable risk minimisation options.
Risk minimisation strategies
Every older person will have their own specific set of care needs and these will be further defined by the severity of condition(s) suffered, their age, the environment and their living arrangements. Alongside these care needs there will also be associated risks that will need to be managed.
To ensure the older person’s safety is met you should identify and apply risk minimisation strategies in accordance with your organisational requirements and the requirements of the older person and carer(s). This will ensure that the care given is done so safely, to the priority and specific requirements of the older person.
You should work with the older person and carer(s) to find the appropriate strategies that can be used and integrated safely into the care management. All persons involved with care and home duties will need to follow the risk minimisation strategies applicable.
The strategies for common problems to health in older people, as suggested below, are possible ways to prevent risk of harm to the older person; this will also depend upon the individual and how they want to manage their condition. It is important to allow the decision-making process of the
older person as this will encourage their commitment to maintaining their own wellbeing.
The following risk minimisation strategies may apply for the following:
⮚ Risk minimisation for depression/anxiety may include:
o introduction of leisure pursuits/activities
o attending a day group to socialise with others
o using a mental health therapist
o use of medication
⮚ Risk minimisation for isolation may include:
o joining social groups
o attending a day group
o arranging regular outdoors visits
o inviting friends/family to visit
⮚ Risk minimisation for abuse may include:
o requesting the presence of the carer/trusted person when in a vulnerable situation or a potential situation of distress
o vetting all persons that may provide a service to the older person and seeking references of services provided
o ensuring that all personal finances and business needs are looked after by a trusted person or professional organisation
o regular checks with the older person to determine their wellbeing and to check any concerns
⮚ Risk minimisation for falls may include:
o exercise and high dose vitamin D
o occupational therapy and/or podiatry care
o psychoactive medication withdrawal
o optimisation of visual abilities
⮚ Risk minimisation for medication may include:
o counting out medication and placing in marked receptacles for required use
o checking and monitoring the health of the older person to determine reactions and if any side effects are experienced
o a checking procedure to ensure that other unprescribed remedies do not conflict with medication taken
o keeping a medication diary
⮚ Risk minimisation for ensuring nutrition and hydration may include:
o cooking foods that the older person likes and enjoys eating
o blending nutritious food into soups and drinks if ingesting solid food is difficult
o providing a meal service to ensure regular meal times are taken
o preparing drinks that the older person can use throughout the day
o keeping a food and drink diary to check on food and fluid intake
⮚ Dysphagia
o swallowing therapy
o change of diet to ensure that foods which are hard to swallow or trigger dysphagia are avoided
o surgery options (if applicable to the person)
o training carer or other worker to help manage the condition and to implement immediate response treatment
⮚ Risk minimisation for continence problems may include:
o ensuring that toilet facilities are close by/easy to access
o timed toilet visits (e.g. setting alarms, or using after meal times)
o seeking the advice of a dietician
o pelvic floor exercises
⮚ Risk minimisation for mobility issues may include:
o use of specialist equipment or conversions within the home
o gentle exercise for movement and to build strength in connective tissue
o encouragement of performing daily activities to retain mobility for as long as possible
o attending physiotherapy/occupational therapy
⮚ Risk minimisation for mental health may include:
o memory aids
o writing down notes and instructions on how to perform daily tasks
o working with a mental health therapist
o attending support groups.
Activity 3B
3.3 – Implement strategies in a safe and effective manner that minimises the older person’s discomfort
3.4 – Support carer in contributing to the implementation of strategies, where appropriate
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Effectively and safely implement strategies. This may involve:
o giving clear instruction to the older person and/or their carer
o providing consistent and careful support and supporting resources
o monitoring progress of strategies and impact on the older person
⮚ Support the carer of the older person to understand their own role in the implementation of new strategies, and to identify any potential obstacles in the provision of care and/or support.
Implementing strategies
To implement the strategies that have been decided upon, you will need to follow a process that is considerate to the older person and the carer(s). Your process should be clear, simple and plausible for those involved to use; they should minimise disruption and discomfort to existing routines.
You should:
⮚ Provide clear instruction and guidance on strategies and accompanying actions, e.g. show how to check the validity of cold callers at the door or on the telephone
⮚ Support the older person and carer on the implementation of strategies and how to apply these to daily activities
⮚ Ensure supporting resources are in place to assist the older person and carer, e.g. making adjustments in the home
⮚ Check the progress of the older person and carer and ensure they have regular communications with you/services in assistance
⮚ Monitor and review the strategies to ensure these are being carried out correctly and to check how well they are working, if changes are needed these should be determined.
Carer support
Be aware of the situation of the carer(s) looking after the older person; check their circumstances and availability to provide care and assistance to the older person.
It may be that the carer is also elderly, or has health problems; they may live with the older person or have their own home to manage. Carers may be in paid employment (unrelated to their care provision role) and have their own families and lives that they lead. Never assume the carer doesn’t have other responsibilities away from the older person.
Carers may be:
⮚ A spouse or partner
⮚ A family member
⮚ A friend/neighbour
⮚ An employed carer who is paid to provide care.
Make sure you are aware of their availability to care, i.e. is this full-time or do they visit every day for two hours? This can make a big difference to your strategies and how these can be implemented in the course of the care arrangements. You may also find that the caring role is shared between family members, a neighbour who may shop or provide companionship, and possibly a home carer who is employed to visit once/twice a week.
You should also consider that the relationship between the older person and carer may be one that is difficult both emotionally and physically for the carer to handle. Part of your strategy to risk minimisation with care requirements may be to introduce respite care or attendance to a day group at certain times, such as once a week.
Providing the opportunity for the carer to have a break may be beneficial to all; the carer can take time to look after their own wellbeing, attend to other responsibilities or just take a break from the responsibility involved with a caring role.
Establish the patterns and routines of both the older person and their carer(s). Once you are aware of this, you can look to working with all relevant carers to help provide consistent and appropriate care which seeks to minimise/eliminate all situations of risk.

questions:
1. Explain the options available to an older person and their carer for the following scenario:   An older person has recently been discharged from hospital after experiencing a fall which caused bruising and grazing to the hips and legs (causing mobility issues); this resulted from balance problems compounded by poor muscle strength. For care in the home what options would you recommend?
*
2. Give an example of when you have worked with an older person and their carer (or as a simulated exercise) to identify and implement risk minimisation strategies for care needs. Provide information on the condition(s) of the older person and the risk minimisation strategies chosen to ensure safety and requirements of the older person were met.
*
3. Carrying on from Activity 3B and the example/scenario given, further explain how the risk minimisation strategies can be implemented in a way that minimises discomfort to the older person and gives support to the carer.

