Unit of Competency
Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to work in partnership with older people and their carers to implement interventions in the context of an individualised plan to reduce risk.
This unit applies to support workers in a residential or community context. Work performed requires a range of well developed skills where some discretion and judgement is required. Workers will take responsibility for their own outputs under direct or indirect supervision.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Sector
N/A
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
4. Monitor risk minimisation strategies
4.1 Monitor the effects of the strategies on the older person
4.2 Identify any indicators of increased risk
4.3 Identify when strategies are not having the desired result and possible reasons for this
4.4 Reassess and identify more appropriate strategies
4.5 Work with the older person and carer to assess the outcomes of risk minimisation strategies
4.6 Discuss feedback from the older person and carer with supervisor and/or or relevant health professional
4.7 Complete, maintain and store all relevant documentation and reports according to organisation policy and protocols in a timely manner
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (such as language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills) that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Assisted with the assessment of risk and the implementation and evaluation of risk minimisation strategies for at least 2 older people, 1 in a simulated environment and 1 in the workplace, in a manner that is respectful of the older person’s dignity and privacy.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ The tensions which may exist between an individual’s rights and the organisation’s responsibility to individuals
⮚ Legal and ethical considerations for working in aged care:
o duty of care
o human rights
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations
⮚ The major issues, trends and policies relating to the health and wellbeing of older people
⮚ Standardised tools for risk assessment and the management and monitoring of risks
⮚ Major risk areas for ageing population:
o depression and anxiety
o isolation
o abuse (sexual, emotional, physical, financial, system)
o falls
o medication
o dehydration and malnutrition
o dysphagia
o continence
⮚ Documentation requirements including the importance of accurate and appropriately detailed records.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in an ageing support workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. These are situations relating to emergency or unplanned procedures where assessment in these circumstances would be unsafe, impractical or threatens the dignity of the older person.
The following conditions must be met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including relevant assessment tools.
Overall, assessment must involve some real interactions with older people, colleagues, families/carers and the use of individualised plans.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - http://www.cshisc.com.au
4. Monitor risk minimisation strategies
4.1.  Monitor the effects of the strategies on the older person
4.2.  Identify any indicators of increased risk
4.3.  Identify when strategies are not having the desired result and possible reasons for this
4.4.  Reassess and identify more appropriate strategies
4.5.  Work with the older person and carer to assess the outcomes of risk minimisation strategies
4.6.  Discuss feedback from the older person and carer with supervisor and/or relevant health professional
4.7.  Complete, maintain and store all relevant documentation and reports according to organisation policy and protocols in a timely manner
4.1 – Monitor the effects of the strategies on the older person
4.2 – Identify any indicators of increased risk
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Adhere to their organisation’s monitoring strategy for monitoring the effects of risk minimisation strategies on the older person
⮚ Compile information to complete any necessary reports
⮚ Assess whether goals are being fulfilled
⮚ Determine whether there has been an increase in an older person’s level of risk
⮚ Report findings in accordance with organisational policy and procedure.
A system to monitor strategies
Put a monitoring system in place to check how the strategies to risk minimisation are working. Monitoring should be performed at regular intervals to check overall progress and to ensure they are being carried out correctly. It will depend upon the situation of the older person, their condition(s) and requirements as to how often you should do perform this.
Monitoring includes:
⮚ Checking care is being provided safely and effectively, including:
o visiting the older person and carer(s) to observe activities and discuss progress
o checking health reports and progress notes
o assessing the environment and living arrangements are still suitable
⮚ Compiling information and evidence for reporting requirements, including making recommendations and required actions
⮚ Recognising if strategies are working and making changes to these as needed.
You should also make sure that the older person is adapting to any changes that may have been made to their environment and to the care systems in place.
Talk/communicate with the older person (and carer) to determine how they are responding to the changes, their level of wellbeing and whether their health is being maintained. If there has been a change in health, are these positive changes due to improvements to systems and care provisions, or are they negative due to more invasive procedures or diminishing health?
Check if:
⮚ Goals are being achieved, i.e. have the situations of risk diminished
⮚ Care requirements are being carried out correctly and effectively, i.e. corners are not being cut when following required strategies
⮚ Resources are being provided as needed, i.e. are services being given as expected, or, are facilities at home accommodating the needs of the older person
⮚ The objectives of the care plan are still being met, i.e. have they changed since implementing the strategies or have the health and care needs changed
⮚ A re-evaluation of care requirements or strategies is needed.
Check for an increase in risk
It may be that some of your strategies are not proving to be as successful, for example, this could be due to a change in the health/condition of the older person, which is out of your control, or they are not being implemented consistently or correctly.
As a consequence of implementing your risk minimisation strategies, you may also find that areas of residual risk remain. This is where other instances of risk are caused as a consequence of implementing the strategies, or where risk still remains – even after making improvements to the older person’s care needs.
Indicators of increased risk may include:
⮚ Anxiety or depression in the older person
⮚ Injury or a downturn in health of the older person
⮚ An increase in occurrences of concern, e.g. an older person suffering from dementia found walking in the surrounding area in confusion
⮚ Additional strain/stresses placed on the carer
⮚ Services are inadequate to the needs of the individual and/or carer.
⮚ The environment looks dishevelled or is dirty/unhygienic.
Report your findings
Document any increases in risk to the older person and/or carer, and seek to find alternative measures. You may need to refer to your supervisor or other relevant health professional to look at making further structured improvements.
These should be made to ensure the safety of all involved, that suitable activities are identified and that expectations are realistic and achievable.
Activity 4A
4.3 – Identify when strategies are not having the desired result and possible reasons for this
4.4 – Reassess and identify more appropriate strategies
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Recognise when strategies are ineffective
⮚ Evaluate the reasons for strategies having little or no positive impact
⮚ Reassess current strategies to identify shortfalls
⮚ Identify more appropriate or additional strategies that will reduce risk.
When a strategy doesn’t work
To identify the strategies that are not working, you will need to carefully assess the results and findings of your monitoring activities.
Your reports from monitoring risk strategies in care requirements may include:
⮚ Care notes to assess care activities, daily activities and responses from the older person
⮚ Communications made with care providers, the older person and their carer
⮚ Hazard reports to identify if hazards still exist
⮚ Incident reports to document incidents of concern that may have occurred
⮚ Risk reassessment to make a further assessment of the risks.
Strategies may fail or not provide the expected results for various reasons. These may be due to environmental factors, medical influences or changes to care services/carer situation.
Reasons may include:
⮚ The level of care being provided needs to be increased, e.g. for a degenerative condition such as Parkinson’s disease
⮚ The individualised care plan is not being followed correctly
⮚ The carer is not physically able to carry out some strategies, e.g. providing personal care hygiene where lifting/assistance is required
⮚ The carer isn’t able to devote additional time to maintain all/some strategies
⮚ The older person is not able to apply the same strategies as identified and used by the carer and/or other care services
⮚ The home environment is no longer the best environment for the older person and their care needs.
Reassess strategies
Perform a reassessment of strategies and consult with your supervisor and/or the appropriate health professionals to determine further strategies for care.
You may need to make a new risk assessment with the older person and review relevant criteria and medical/health information to determine new actions.
New actions may include:
⮚ Providing additional services for home care, e.g.
o domestic help
o transportation
o social support
o allied health support, such as physiotherapy or podiatry
o nursing care
⮚ Providing more support through additional home visits and communications
⮚ Reassessing the level of home care package provided
⮚ Looking at providing care in an aged care home.
Activity 4B
4.5 – Work with the older person and carer to assess the outcomes of risk minimisation strategies
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Assess the outcomes of risk minimisation strategies in accordance with organisational policy and procedure
⮚ Obtain feedback from older person and their carer to assist in assessing outcomes
⮚ Determine the positive and negative outcomes of implemented strategies.
Assessing the outcomes
From your review on strategies and the subsequent care activities that have taken place, you should work with the older person and carer(s) to assess the outcomes. Working with the older person and carer(s) will enable you to fully determine the measure of success and provide a consistent understanding to all on the progress made.
Make sure that a prearranged appointment is made to visit the older person and carer(s) and that you have fully explained the purpose of your visit so that the older person and carer have time to consider the strategies that have been put in place. You should ensure that the older person and carer(s) are fully compliant on your request and visit.
Outcomes of risk minimisation strategies may be positive and/or negative. Construct a checklist
Before your discussions with the older person and carer(s) take place, make sure you have organised and produced a set of requirements. This will help you to predetermine the criteria for the assessment of risk outcomes and put together the correct information for working with the older person and carer(s).
You will need to know:
⮚ How the strategies have impacted upon activities and daily routines?
⮚ Have these been difficult to implement or maintain?
⮚ Have you seen/experienced positive results from these?
⮚ Have there been difficulties for the older person as a result of the strategies?
Your organisation may have standard questionnaires or forms that you can use for your assessment, if so, make sure that the standard questions and information will cover all that you need to know.
Follow procedures and legal requirements
Follow your organisational procedures, adhering to all legal aspects and duty of care to your client and their carer(s). Information discussed should be treated confidentially and with the utmost respect for the older person and carer(s).
The dignity of the older person should be preserved and you should remember to conduct your communications sensitively as information about the older person and their care arrangements will be openly discussed.
Feedback
Your work with the older person and carer(s) will give you invaluable feedback on care services and how these are working with the implemented risk minimisation strategies.
Working together to assess outcomes will enable you to collate first-hand experiences; you can also observe how these strategies are carried out through activities. This will give you both a verbal and visual confirmation on their effectiveness and will show if the level of care needed is being met.
Activity 4C
4.6 – Discuss feedback from the older person and carer with supervisor and/or relevant health professional
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Obtain feedback directly from the older person and/or their carer
⮚ Discuss this feedback with their supervisor and/or relevant health professionals.
Take time to obtain feedback
Feedback can be given verbally and in writing and will depend upon how your communications are conducted in the course of your work duties. For care of an older person, feedback is best gained directly from the persons involved, i.e. the older person, the carer(s) and any other service providers.
Conducting a verbal/face-to-face communication will provide you the opportunity to:
⮚ Pick up on emotional responses
⮚ Interpret body language
⮚ Engage in discussions
⮚ Be open and caring in your communications
⮚ Clarify information
⮚ Be supportive with the care needs of the older person
⮚ Provide reassurance over care concerns.
Provide feedback to others
To progress your requirements for risk minimisation and to provide the correct care intervention, you should discuss the feedback gained with your supervisor and any other relevant health professionals.
You will need to analyse the feedback provided and assess whether:
⮚ Feedback is objective
⮚ Feedback provides clear accounts/details
⮚ There are influences prompting feedback, e.g. has the older person or carer been influenced by other persons or received information from other sources.
Feedback is vital to making improvements to your care plan and to the health and wellbeing of the older person (and their carer(s)). Being involved in the care of others will involve making objective decisions while keeping a focus on providing a person-centred approach to your client’s care needs.
Activity 4D
4.7 – Complete, maintain and store all relevant documentation and reports according to organisation policy and protocols in a timely manner
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Complete relevant documentation and reports for the cases they handle in a timely manner
⮚ Ensure that all documentation and reports are written concisely, accurately and objectively
⮚ Maintain and update documentation as required
⮚ Store documentation and reports in accordance with organisational policy and procedure
⮚ Comply with mandatory reporting requirements.
Documentation
When creating reports and workplace documents, you need to comply with organisational reporting requirements at all times.
In order to keep track of quality of service, it is important to have good documentation practices in place. Many records and work documentation are created and accessed on computers and database systems; you may also need to keep paper copies.
Each person receiving care services must have a care plan in place to monitor their ongoing needs. This plan should contain progress notes, as these will be used to review care needs in the future. Besides being useful, this documentation is a legal requirement and will directly affect how much government funding the person in care receives.
The following general tips are useful in all cases:
⮚ Documentation should be completed as soon as possible after any event/incident
⮚ Progress notes are legal documents. They must be filled out the following way:
o using black ink and printed
o no correction fluids (tip-ex, whiteout) to be used
o corrections must be indicated by a line drawn over the mistake. initial the correction and re-write the information
o draw a line to the end of the page where documenting information does not fill all the allocated lines (as per a personal cheque)
o date all notes and include the time of the incident
o sign all notes a print documenter's name and position/status.
Written documents
Ensure progress notes are written in the active voice rather than the passive, as this gets the message across more directly and helps with concise writing. Written documents can include progress reports, case notes and incident reports.
Documents should be:
⮚ Concise
⮚ Objective
⮚ By exception
⮚ Appropriate in language and terminology (no slang, unless recording direct speech)
⮚ Include only necessary information.
Concise documentation
This means including the right amount of information – not too little or too much. You need to get to the point in as few words as possible; use appropriate words, sentence structures and avoid frivolous information that is not relevant.
Objective documentation
This involves only including the facts in documentation and no opinions or bias affecting what is recording. Subjective information is based on assumptions and feelings and will not accurately portray the incident.
Documentation by exception
This means to only include events and information that affect the care plan. Such examples could be changes in client behaviour, emotions and physical ability, as well as incidents involving the client.
You need to think in terms of things that:
⮚ Will affect the direction of care plan
⮚ Relate to the health of the client
⮚ Involve client care refusals, care omissions, client complaints
⮚ Involve client behaviour affecting their health and wellbeing.
Verbal reports
These can be done face-to-face or over the telephone. You should use this method of reporting when communication is required urgently, or in an emergency situation i.e. those involving the immediate safety of carers or the people in care. The same principles apply to verbal reporting as to written reporting – keep it concise, objective and include only relevant information.
Structuring notes
When thinking of what information to include in notes, use the following as a guide:
⮚ Who is it about?
⮚ Where did it happen?
⮚ When did it happen?
⮚ What happened?
⮚ Why did it happen?
⮚ How did it happen (if factual evidence exists)?
⮚ What did you do (if applicable)?
⮚ Types of documentation
There is a wide range of documentation that may pass through your service; some may be standard and familiar to the running of the service, such as a referral document, while others may be less used. Most will include medical terminology regarding conditions, diagnosis and treatments.
Documentation may include:
⮚ Applications for services
⮚ Claim forms
⮚ Patient/client records
⮚ Medical/health cards
⮚ Supply/medical stores documentation
⮚ Information on services for clients
⮚ Certificates
⮚ Medical reports
⮚ Care reports
⮚ Staff documentation.
Note: never disclose information to those other than the relevant health and care professionals involved and always seek permission from the older person if you need to pass information to other services/professionals.
Storing documentation
Documentation must be filed in accordance with organisation policy and protocols – this ensures it can easily be located at a later time. For instance, there may be a dispute about the quality and level of care, which can easily be resolved to accessing and consulting the documents relevant to the time.
Filing is something many people have problem with; organisation cannot only make you more productive, it can also simplify your workload and make it less stressful to file or look for a specific document in the future. Being organised doesn’t take a complicated filing system.
Make sure that all electronic/computer records are saved and stored appropriately; access to records should only be given to those persons who have permission. All paper copies should be stored in a suitable filing system that is kept secure and is easy to navigate.
Classifying folders/documents
Depending on the nature of your job role, you will create folders that will best fit the needs of your tasks, duties and responsibilities.
For example:
⮚ Administration staff who work in the warehousing department will probably have folders classified as: orders received, ordered processed, orders picked and packed, ordered despatched, damaged and missing goods, follow ups etc.
Sorting documents
Go through them, one at a time. Pick up each document or folder and decide what needs to be done with it. If you do not need any parts make sure you dispose of them appropriately (shredding any personal/confidential information). When you see printouts of emails – read through the printout and determine if any further follow up is required. If you have kept a digital copy of the email, and no other follow-up is required, the printout can be put through the paper-shredding machine. If you find some documents that should not be sitting with you, try to send it to the appropriate personnel.
Filing documents
After sorting the documents, you will be ready to file them into their respective folders. If files need to be stored securely (under lock and key) to comply with client confidentiality requirements, make sure this is carried out. All electronic files should have restricted access rights, so that only those with permission can view and use these.
Documents may be filed according to:
⮚ Alphabetical order (according to clients’ names, companies’ names etc.)
⮚ Chronological order (oldest to the most current date etc.)
⮚ In each financial year (2011-2012 or 2012-2013)
⮚ Series numbers.
Mandatory notification
It important that you are able to identify and report any issues that require mandatory notification. You should pass these on to your supervisor and/or the appropriate authority.
Issues requiring mandatory notification may include:
⮚ Protection of children and others identified to be at risk
⮚ Issues defined by jurisdictional legislation and/or regulatory requirements
⮚ Issues specifically identified under organisation policies.
It is a legal requirement that these issues are reported; if you fail to do so, the consequences can be quite severe and you may be putting clients and colleagues at risk.

questions:
1. Why should you monitor the risk minimisation strategies that have been implemented?
*
2. Name five indicators of increased risk that you might observe on the older person, the carer(s) or in the environment.
*
3. Give an example of (from your place of work, or as a simulated exercise) where risk minimisation strategies have not worked as successfully as expected and provide the reasons for this and how you did (or can) develop further strategies appropriate to the situation.
*
4. Explain how you would assess risk minimisation strategies with the older person and carer.
*
5. Why should you complete documentation for work purposes?
*
6. What does documentation by exception mean?
