This unit describes the skills and knowledge required to work positively with the carers and families of people using the service based on an understanding of their support needs.
This unit applies to workers across a range of community services contexts.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
1. Include carers and family members as part of the support team
1.1 Assess and acknowledge the role and importance of carers and family members for the person
1.2 Work in a manner that recognises and supports carer’s relationship with, and knowledge about, the person with support needs
1.3 Identify the knowledge and skills of the carer that complement the role of the worker
1.4 Involve carers and families in the design and delivery of the person’s support services
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Assessed and responded to the needs of at least 3 different people and their carers or family members
⮚ Used strengths-based solutions to respond to both routine and unpredictable problems related to care relationships.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Context for caring in Australia:
o carer demographics
o carer support organisations and resources
o attitudes, stereotypes, false beliefs and myths associated with caring
o different pathways into service settings for the person and the implications for carers, families and friends
⮚ Rights, roles and responsibilities of different people in the care relationship
o the person
o family members
o friends
o support worker
⮚ Impact of the caring role on family, carers and friends
⮚ Different family patterns and structures and their impact on the person
⮚ Life cycle transitions:
o types of transitions
o positive and negative impacts
⮚ Current service delivery philosophy and models:
o basic principles of person-centred practice, strengths-based practice and active support
o strategies to work positively with families, carers and friends
⮚ Organisation policies and procedures in relation to carers and families
⮚ Legal and ethical requirements for working with carers and families and how these are applied in an organisation and individual practice, including:
o discrimination
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. The following conditions must have been met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including organisation policy, protocols and procedures relevant to carers and families
⮚ Modelling of industry operating conditions and contingencies, including people, carers or family members with whom the candidate can interact
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e5
1. Include careers and family members as part of the support team
1.1.  Assess and acknowledge the role and importance of careers and family members for the person
1.2.  Work in a manner that recognises and supports career’s relationship with, and knowledge about, the person with support needs
1.3.  Identify the knowledge and skills of the career that complement the role of the worker
1.4.  Involve careers and families in the design and delivery of the person’s support services
1.1 – Assess and acknowledge the role and importance of carers and family members for the person
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify a client’s primary carer
⮚ Identify two ways in which the carer carries out their role.
Role and importance of carers and family members
In order to include carers and family members as part of the support team in an effective way, you will need to ensure that you assess, understand and acknowledge the role they have and the importance that they have for the person.
Carers are often family members or friends of the client and they will have a huge role in their life. You will need to make sure you know exactly what they do and what they do not do – the reasons for this are so that you can carry out the client needs that are currently unfulfilled and so that you don't step on the toes of the family carer. If you fail to do this, you increase the burden on them and the client's needs may go unmet.
You will need to liaise with your supervisor and confirm your specific role within the whole care plan, with respect to how you will figure in their life and help them care for the person with support needs. This should not infringe on the existing role of the carer and should complement them.
From this, you can determine your specific responsibilities and how you will figure in their overall care plan. You need to know the exact tasks you will be required to perform/help with, so that you do not overstep the boundaries of your responsibilities – this can lead to legal dangers, if you are unqualified to perform such things.
Tasks that the carer may complete include:
⮚ Cleaning
⮚ Cooking
⮚ Buying groceries
⮚ Taking them to medical appointments
⮚ Translation tasks
⮚ Communication tasks
⮚ Filling in forms
⮚ Advocacy
⮚ Bathing
⮚ Money management
⮚ Organising other care services
⮚ Paying bills.
Basic family relationships and dynamics
Family dynamics will differ between families, so how people relate to each other and what this means will alter accordingly. It is a good idea to gain an understanding of the person with support needs and their family, including the relationships, dynamics and importance.
People are influenced by a number of internal and external factors, such as:
⮚ The personalities of each family member
⮚ Personalities of other people (non-family) in the house
⮚ Having other family members who are disabled/chronically sick
⮚ Events that affect family relationships e.g. violence, affairs and abuse
⮚ Relationship between parents
⮚ Parenting style (soft/hard)
⮚ Number of siblings
⮚ Absent parent(s)
⮚ Cultural background, values and beliefs
⮚ Closeness of family members
⮚ Dynamics of previous generations in the family
⮚ Social, economic and political systems in their environment.
Despite people being individuals, their background and surroundings can influence a lot of how they behave and feel as a person.
There are various structures of families:
⮚ Nuclear – parents and siblings
⮚ Extended – grandparents, aunts, uncles and cousins
⮚ Working parents
⮚ Single parents
⮚ Large age gaps between siblings
⮚ Young parents
⮚ Step-families
⮚ Adoption.
Family roles
There are different roles within families and which one you fulfil can influence how you perceive others and expect them to behave (and vice versa).
Roles include:
⮚ Black sheep – this person is often blamed for problems in the family and labelled as "difficult"
⮚ Birth order – the oldest child tends to be more responsible and takes on duties; the middle child will often rebel; the youngest often struggles with identity and parents can be over-protective of them
⮚ Children acting parental – children can often parent their own parents or siblings, helping with emotional and practical support (cooking, cleaning and filling in forms). The problem this can pose is reluctance to share their own problems at the fear of becoming a burden to those they are caring for. This can lead to eventual rebellion and distancing themselves from the family they once supported.
You will need to determine the importance of the various family members and their roles in the client's life through a structured discussion about their needs and preferences. If there are particular family members who play an important role in their existence, you will need to work with these people to incorporate them into the care plan. They will often be willing to help out with the client's support needs. You should not isolate the client from their family – having them present and performing their usual roles will help the client adjust to their support visits, just as it will instil a sense of normality.
The impact of disability and ageing on family and other natural supports
Disabilities and ageing can have a huge impact on family and other natural supports, as the extra burden placed on them for care can be difficult to deal with. The impacts can be mental, physical, social or financial.
Carer health and wellbeing
Carers can suffer a decline in their physical/mental health and wellbeing due to the stress and time of caring for someone else.
The types of issues include:
⮚ Physical injuries (due to lifting)
⮚ Stress
⮚ Disturbed sleep
⮚ Depression
⮚ Chronic pain.
Poverty and the cost of caring
Carers have lower participation in the working force than those without care responsibilities. They rely on pensions if they are not working or, if they are working, they face pressure to maintain their working commitments.
Those most likely to face financial difficulties include:
⮚ Young carers
⮚ Single parents
⮚ Ageing carers
⮚ Low income earners.
As well as loss of earnings, there are additional costs involved with care – these can be direct (i.e. for the disabled person) or indirect (i.e. for the carer – things like medication and therapy for stress). The National Centre for Social and Economic Modelling estimates that carers are $5,600 a year worse off than non-carers, with a government pension the main source of income for 40 per cent of these (NASTEM 2006).
Of the direct costs, equipment costs (and modifications to these) of disabled people are often self- funded, which can severely affect their financial status.
Family and carer issues
Carers provide around 70 per cent of care to people with disabilities – many of these are unpaid and this is worth $41.4 billion nationally, accounting for 1,039,000 carers in 2005-6. Note that, in the same period, the government spent $28.9 billion on welfare. Therefore, it is obvious that carers and family helpers are dramatically underfunded.
The government does have national initiatives to benefit carers, such as:
⮚ Commonwealth Carelink Centres
⮚ Carer Resource Centres
⮚ Carer Respite Centres
⮚ Centrelink.
There is also legislation to benefit carers:
⮚ Disability Services Act 1993
⮚ Carers Recognition Act 2004
⮚ Equal Opportunity Act 1984.
Carers can be involved short or long term, sometimes for the duration of the person's life, or until they become a young adult, or self-sufficient, or enter a residential facility.
The demands of carers are substantial and they can experience any of the following:
⮚ Reduced mental/physical health
⮚ Poverty
⮚ Limited educational and work opportunities
⮚ Social isolation
⮚ Housing difficulties.
So, in order to assess and acknowledge the importance of the carer or family member, you must first understand the relationship they have with the person needing the support. This will give you the opportunity to include them as part of the support team in an effective way.
Activity 1A
1.2 – Work in a manner that recognises and supports carer’s relationship with, and knowledge about, the person with support needs
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Determine the two things the support worker should do in accordance with the carer’s wishes, according to a given Case Study.
The carer's relationship with the person with support needs
The carer will have a pre-existing relationship with the person with support needs and along with this will come prior knowledge about them. You will need to recognise and support this relationship – use the knowledge they already have to find out needs and preferences of the client.
The carer's relationship may include:
⮚ Child
⮚ Friend
⮚ Grandparent
⮚ Neighbour
⮚ Other relative
⮚ Parent
⮚ Sibling
⮚ Spouse/partner (including same sex partner).
Supporting this relationship will mean things like:
⮚ Consulting them on care decisions
⮚ Allowing them to retain care duties they usually do
⮚ Giving them privacy
⮚ Facilitating the normal relationship activities
⮚ Working unobtrusively.
The knowledge that the carer has about the person with support needs includes:
⮚ Care preferences
⮚ Hobbies
⮚ Life story
⮚ Needs they may not be verbalising
⮚ Leisure activities
⮚ Daily schedule
⮚ Dealing with conflict
⮚ Food preferences
⮚ Personality
⮚ Normal behaviour
⮚ Behaviours of concern
⮚ Medication.
Activity 1B
1.3 – Identify the knowledge and skills of the carer that complement the role of the worker
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify the two key skills the carer possesses.
Knowledge and skills of the carer
Everyone comes will a slightly different skill set, with respective strengths and weaknesses. It is to your advantage to identify these in the carer and how they can complement those of yourself (the care worker).
Examples of knowledge and skills include:
⮚ People skills
⮚ Communication skills
⮚ Observation skills
⮚ Teamwork skills
⮚ Negotiation skills
⮚ Knowledge of specific disabilities (effect, cares strategies)
⮚ Experience working with aged/disability care
⮚ Experience dealing with violent outbursts
⮚ Active listening.
There will be other more specific skill sets, but you need to identify your own and those of others so that your weaknesses are covered by their strengths and vice versa. The idea is that, together, the care and support team will provide a comprehensive skill set so all the client's needs are covered.
If there are still skills and knowledge gaps in the team, you need to rectify this by reporting to your supervisor – it may either require further training or additional personnel to be recruited in the team.
Activity 1C
1.4 – Involve carers and families in the design and delivery of the person’s support services
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Determine how the support worker has involved the carer in the delivery of support services in Case Study A.
Designing and delivering support services
As well as the person themselves, it is essential to include their carer and family in the design and delivery of the support services. As we have already established, the carer and family members will have a better understanding of the person – this can be used to ensure the design and delivery of the support services is suitable and beneficial.
The designing and delivery of support services may involve planning the daily activities of the person with support needs.
For example, the following activities may be part of the person’s support services:
⮚ Accessing financial resources and allowances
⮚ Paying bills and regular outgoings
⮚ Shopping
⮚ Preparing meals
⮚ Climbing stairs
⮚ Maintaining household (cleaning, laundry, décor, repairs)
⮚ Travelling by private and public transport
⮚ Interacting with others and socialising
⮚ Accessing leisure, recreational and sporting activities
⮚ Recreational and sporting activities
⮚ Craft and creative activities
⮚ Socialising
⮚ Reminiscing activities
⮚ Spiritual activities.
Other things to consider include:
⮚ Adapting activities to meet individual needs
⮚ Demonstrating cultural sensitivity
⮚ Undertaking observation and analysis of client needs.
The carer and family members will be able to assist you in ensuring the support services are appropriate and suitable for the person. They may spot something that you’ve missed. You should encourage positive contact between everyone and provide any information in the appropriate format.
Activity 1D
1. Give examples of the different tasks that carers or family members may be responsible for.
*
2. List the various family structures that may exist.
*
3. Explore the different factors that can affect family roles.
*
4. How can you support the carer's relationship with the person with support needs?
*
5. What useful knowledge might the carer have about the person with support needs?
*
6. What knowledge and skills might the carer have?
*
7. Think about your own skills and knowledge; how could the career’s complement yours?
*
8. Why is important to involve carers and families in the design and delivery of a person’s support services?
*
9. Part of designing and delivering support services involves planning daily activities. Give examples of these activities.
*
10. What else should you consider?
*
