2. Assess and respond to changes in the care relationship
2.1 Assess potential risks of change to the care relationship including any potential physical and psychological harm to carers and the person
2.2 Support the person, carer and family to identify and use strategies that maximise positive aspects of change and transition
2.3 Support carers, families and friends to maximise ongoing support and involvement in the life of the person
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Assessed and responded to the needs of at least 3 different people and their carers or family members
⮚ Used strengths-based solutions to respond to both routine and unpredictable problems related to care relationships.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Context for caring in Australia:
o carer demographics
o carer support organisations and resources
o attitudes, stereotypes, false beliefs and myths associated with caring
o different pathways into service settings for the person and the implications for carers, families and friends
⮚ Rights, roles and responsibilities of different people in the care relationship
o the person
o family members
o friends
o support worker
⮚ Impact of the caring role on family, carers and friends
⮚ Different family patterns and structures and their impact on the person
⮚ Life cycle transitions:
o types of transitions
o positive and negative impacts
⮚ Current service delivery philosophy and models:
o basic principles of person-centred practice, strengths-based practice and active support
o strategies to work positively with families, carers and friends
⮚ Organisation policies and procedures in relation to carers and families
⮚ Legal and ethical requirements for working with carers and families and how these are applied in an organisation and individual practice, including:
o discrimination
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. The following conditions must have been met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including organisation policy, protocols and procedures relevant to carers and families
⮚ Modelling of industry operating conditions and contingencies, including people, carers or family members with whom the candidate can interact
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
2. Assess and respond to changes in the care relationship
2.1.  Assess potential risks of change to the care relationship including any potential physical and psychological harm to carers and the person
2.2.  Support the person, carer and family to identify and use strategies that maximise positive aspects of change and transition
2.3.  Support carers, families and friends to maximise ongoing support and involvement in the life of the person
2.1 – Assess potential risks of change to the care relationship including any potential physical and psychological harm to carers and the person
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify two changes to the care relationship detailed in Case Study B.
The changing nature of care relationships
Relationships will naturally change and the caring relationship is no different. This can be down to changing circumstances or developments in internal and external factors. When you take on the extra responsibility of caring, this can mean that the previous relationship you had with the person changes. Depending on the nature of the care you provide, you may have to perform things with the person you have never previously done. This can include things like bathing, which require close physical contact and may be uncomfortable for both parties at first.
Another aspect that can change the relationship is the fact that you will be spending more time with the person with needs than before. This can have either a positive or negative effect on your perception of them. It can often reverse the previous roles in parental or spousal relationships – this can lead to feelings of loss or uncertainty. If you have to take over duties and responsibilities, it can cause stress and make you feel scared. If you are forced to parent your own parents, you may have to treat them like a child at times – however, there is a fine line between this and degrading them to the point that they feel useless and you becoming overly controlling.
Other factors that will affect the nature of the care relationship depend on the reason that the carer is fulfilling their duties:
⮚ Out of moral duty – they feel it is the right thing to do in the circumstances.
⮚ Out of practicality – out of those who could provide care, they are best suited for the time and skills it requires.
⮚ As a natural extension of their previous relationship with the person – it is not a burden and they are doing it out of love.
In some cases, the effect of the caring relationship can be boosted if the extra responsibilities and skills gained increase their self-esteem and confidence. The extra time spent with them can also increase closeness and create a bond that may have previously been missing. Personality changes can affect the relationship between carers and their family member as people find it hard to argue to someone who is sick. This can cause frustration and a sense of loss over the person they used to be. This can also, change the relationship dynamic, as it may be more effective to treat them like a professional care worker would, taking emotional attachment out of the equation.
Potential risks of change
This change in relationships can create many potential risks to the person with support needs and their carer. This may include potential physical and psychological harm to them both.
Risks to the care relationship may include:
⮚ Conflict in relationships with family or service providers
⮚ High intensity care
⮚ High level of carer stress
⮚ Loss of formal or informal supports
⮚ Multiple competing role demands
⮚ Worsening carer health
⮚ Worsening health or behaviour of the person with support.
Conflict in relationships with family or service providers
Just because you are caring for someone, does not mean you are immune to falling out with them. Also, you have to consider that there are other family members and service providers that they may not see eye to eye with. If these relationships break down, it can affect the ability to deliver services appropriately. In particular, it can mean that strengths-based practice becomes impossible, as this requires cohesion between all parties involved.
High intensity care
If the care requirements are particularly intense, it can increase the burden on those providing care considerably. This can then lead to stress and resentment toward the people they are caring for. They may also blame the person for the difficulty of providing care and the things they have had to give up to support them.
High level of carer stress
As previously mentioned, caring can be a stressful and this can make it difficult to cope with. As stress builds up over time, tension can also mount and, if not dealt with, this can harm relationships with others involved in care and even lead to abuse.
Loss of formal or informal supports
Support is important in managing the care requirements of an individual – if this is lost, it can mean the loss of guidance, funding, educational tools and other necessary things. This can make the situation much more difficult to deal with, as the needs of the carer will often have to be sacrificed to fulfil those of the person in care.
Multiple competing role demands
If they are caring for more than one dependent person, it can be difficult to provide sufficient services to all parties. For example, if you take a single mother who is caring for her father with dementia, she also has her child to look after and provide for. Due to both roles being time consuming and emotionally and physically draining, it can be difficult to prioritise and meet the needs and demands of all parties.
Worsening carer health
If the carer develops a detrimental condition of their own, it may limit the ability for them to provide the same level of care as they did previously. It may stop them altogether and you will have to look at the possibility of reassigning their responsibilities or moving the person with support needs into a residential home, so the original carer can recover and attend to their own needs.
Worsening health or behaviour of the person with support
If the health of the person the carer is looking after worsens, it may be that the level of support they receive increases. This is common with progressive conditions like Alzheimer's disease and Osteoarthritis. In severe cases, it may be that the person with support requires full-time care which, if unable to be provided by their carer, will mean they need to move into a residential care facility.
Activity 2A
2.2 – Support the person, carer and family to identify and use strategies that maximise positive aspects of change and transition
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Outline one strategy which would be useful to support the individuals through the transition detailed in Case Study B.
Maximising positive aspects of change and transition
As well as potential risks and negative effects of change and transition, there are also many positive aspects. As well as accounting for the risks associated with change, you should identify these positive aspects and figure out the ways in which these can be maximised. It is your job to support the person, carer and family to identify and use strategies that will maximise these positive aspects.
Transitions may include:
⮚ Pre-caring
⮚ Taking on a carer role
⮚ Engaging formal services
⮚ Life cycle transitions (e.g. childhood, adolescence, young adulthood, middle and older age)
⮚ Client entry into day or overnight respite
⮚ Client move from home to a supported residential setting
⮚ End of life/palliative care.
Strategies that maximise positive aspects of change and transition may include:
⮚ Acknowledging anxiety
⮚ Providing opportunities for active involvement
⮚ Maximising support structure
⮚ Promoting the benefits of taking time for self-care
⮚ Providing reassurance.
Acknowledging anxiety
Change and transition is a worrying time for a person with support needs. It’s okay to be anxious – the person shouldn’t feel like they have to hide it. You should acknowledge it and recognise what they are going through and accept how they are handling it. Your job is to support the person in dealing with their anxiety and overcoming the issues that they face when change or transition occurs. Many people associate anxiety with something bad. Just because the person feels anxious is doesn’t mean that something bad will happen – you should try to help them understand this. Focus on the positives – what is this change or transition going to do for them? How can you use it to their advantage?
Providing opportunities for active involvement
With change and transition comes an opportunity for people to be actively involved in their care and support. You should highlight these opportunities for the person with support needs and encourage them to be involved with their care and support. Think about the different ways people can be involved in their own care – how can they contribute or participate? It can be as simple or as complex as suitable for their particular situation.
Maximising support structure
Change and transition can mean more people involved in a person’s care and support. The more people involved the more skills, knowledge, strengths and abilities available. Combined, this variety of skills, knowledge, strengths and abilities will ensure the support structure available for the person is of the highest possible quality. Your job is to figure out ways to maximise this support structure – how can you make the best use of it? This will involve working together to complement each other’s’ strengths, skills and knowledge and ensuring the person receives the best possible care and support that the support structure can offer.
Promoting the benefits of taking time for self-care
Change and transitions gives you the chance to encourage the person with support needs to take time for self-care. In what ways can they take care of themselves? How can they
help to manage their own health? Your job is to promote the benefits of self- care. Why should they take the time to self-care? Benefits include an improved quality of life whilst being able to maintain their pride and keep their dignity.
Providing reassurance
In order to maximise the positive aspects of change and transition, you may need to provide the person (and in some cases, the carer and family members) with reassurance. With change and transition comes uncertainty – this can be difficult for people to deal with. Your job is to provide everyone with the reassurance that they need. How can you remove their doubts and fears? How
can you comfort them and let them know everything is going to be okay? This will involve recognising the situation that they are in and being supportive in any way possible. You should remain confident, positive and optimistic.
Activity 2B
2.3 – Support carers, families and friends to maximise ongoing support and involvement in the life of the person
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Explain how to support a carer’s wishes in response to Case Study B.
Maximising ongoing support
You should ensure that you support carers, families and friends to maximise the ongoing support and involvement in the life of the person. Remember, it’s all about working together to ensure that the person with needs benefits from the support of each of you. It shouldn’t be about you taking over – it’s about complementing the carer, family members and friends of the person with support needs.
Ask yourself:
⮚ How do they support the person?
⮚ How are they involved in the person’s life?
⮚ What skills, knowledge, experiences and abilities do they offer?
⮚ What skills, knowledge, experiences and abilities can you offer?
⮚ How can you provide support in a way that maximises their support?
⮚ How can you work together to benefit the person?
A good way to know how to support carers, family members and friends is to ask them – don’t just assume. They can tell you exactly what they need from you and you can ensure you do your best to give them that.
Activity 2C
1. Outline a potential change to a care relationship.
*
2. What potential risks could be associated with this change?
*
3. Choose one strategy that you would support a person, their carer and their family in using to maximise the positive aspects of change and transition. Why would you use it and how would it help?
*
4. In order to support carers, families and friends to maximise their ongoing support and involvement in the life of a person, what should you ask yourself?
*
5. Outline a way you have supported carer, family member or friend to maximise their support and involvement in a person’s life. What did you do? Why did you do it? What effect did it have?
