3. Monitor and promote carer rights, health and well being
3.1 Respect the confidentiality and privacy of the carer, as well as the person with support needs
3.2 Identify and respond to the need for services required by the carer to support the care relationship with the person
3.3 Identify and respond to issues that may impact on the physical and emotional health and well being of the carer
3.4 Provide carers and families with information about carer support services.
Foundation Skills
This section describes language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills incorporated in the performance criteria that are required for competent performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Assessed and responded to the needs of at least 3 different people and their carers or family members
⮚ Used strengths-based solutions to respond to both routine and unpredictable problems related to care relationships.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ Context for caring in Australia:
o carer demographics
o carer support organisations and resources
o attitudes, stereotypes, false beliefs and myths associated with caring
o different pathways into service settings for the person and the implications for carers, families and friends
⮚ Rights, roles and responsibilities of different people in the care relationship
o the person
o family members
o friends
o support worker
⮚ Impact of the caring role on family, carers and friends
⮚ Different family patterns and structures and their impact on the person
⮚ Life cycle transitions:
o types of transitions
o positive and negative impacts
⮚ Current service delivery philosophy and models:
o basic principles of person-centred practice, strengths-based practice and active support
o strategies to work positively with families, carers and friends
⮚ Organisation policies and procedures in relation to carers and families
⮚ Legal and ethical requirements for working with carers and families and how these are applied in an organisation and individual practice, including:
o discrimination
o privacy, confidentiality and disclosure
o work role boundaries – responsibilities and limitations.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in the workplace or in a simulated environment that reflects workplace conditions. The following conditions must have been met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including organisation policy, protocols and procedures relevant to carers and families
⮚ Modelling of industry operating conditions and contingencies, including people, carers or family members with whom the candidate can interact
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
3. Monitor and promote carer rights, health and well being
3.1.  Respect the confidentiality and privacy of the carer, as well as the person with support needs
3.2.  Identify and respond to the need for services required by the carer to support the care relationship with the person
3.3.  Identify and respond to issues that may impact on the physical and emotional health and well being of the carer
3.4.  Provide carers and families with information about carer support services
3.1 – Respect the confidentiality and privacy of the carer, as well as the person with support needs
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify how to respect confidentiality and privacy in response to Case Study C.
Confidentiality
When working with carers and people with support needs, you need to respect their confidentiality and privacy rights. Personal information should be protected and only disclosed professionally. Medical records are an example of confidential information. It is part of duty of care and applies to all clients, regardless of their status. Therefore, it includes clients with mental illnesses, physical or mental disabilities, drug/alcohol problems and those who are difficult to deal with. The only situation where this private information can be disclosed is when there is a serious threat or risk of injury to the person concerned or others. Other than that, the person concerned may choose to disclose their information – but it is their choice only.
Organisation policy on confidentiality may relate to:
⮚ Access to records
⮚ Carriage and storage of records
⮚ Collection and use of client's personal and health information
⮚ Destruction of records
⮚ Release of information.
Types of confidential information include:
⮚ Names and addresses of clients
⮚ Phone numbers and addresses of staff
⮚ Names and personal details of benefactors and volunteers
⮚ Details of funding
⮚ Strategic planning information.
Ways to ensure confidential information is kept safe include:
⮚ Keeping it in locked filing cabinets
⮚ Keeping it away from unauthorised people
⮚ Keeping it in locked rooms
⮚ Having it password protected on computers
⮚ Refraining from naming clients in public discussion.
Clients will need to give permission (normally in writing) for their information to be released to others; if they are unable to do this through disability or death, advocates can grant permission.
Clients also have a right to view their records – this information should be supplied only by authorised personnel in that field. If access is denied the client should be informed why and given details of when the decision can be reviewed. Any comments they make should be attached to their notes in an addendum.
There should be policies in place to deal with workers who breach confidentiality – these will depend on your specific industry. Breaching confidentiality can, however, give clients a right to open legal action against you and if the individual or organisation is found responsible, accreditation and awards could be removed from the culprit.
Staff must be versed in all confidentiality legislation, organisational policies and which information should be treated as confidential. They need to know the policies and procedures for every possible situation, so regular training is essential.
Note: information cannot be disclosed to those not directly involved in the client's case.
Privacy
People also have a right to privacy and this should be respected – for certain personal activities, you will need to give the carer and person with support needs privacy.
These may include:
⮚ Bathing
⮚ Getting dressed
⮚ Sexual intimacy
⮚ Disclosure of personal information (unrelated to care).
Activity 3A
3.2 – Identify and respond to the need for services required by the career to support the care relationship with the person
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify how to respect confidentiality and privacy in response to Case Study C.
Need for services
You may find that the carer will need specific services in order to support the person – it is your job to identify and respond to this need. What services do they require to provide the care and support that the person needs?
Services that they may require include:
⮚ Gardening services
⮚ Cleaning services
⮚ Accommodation support
⮚ Laundry services
⮚ Meal preparation and/or delivery services
⮚ Shopping services
⮚ Transport services
⮚ Respite for person or carer.
A carer should not try to take on everything – if they need a little help then they should be encouraged to seek and take it.
Once you have identified the services that they require, you should provide them with the relevant information that they need to make an informed decision. Sometimes, you may need to arrange the service yourself.
Activity 3B
3.3 – Identify and respond to issues that may impact on the physical and emotional health and well being of the carer
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Suggest two issues from the scenario provided in Case Study D which could impact on the health and wellbeing of the carer.
Impact on carer
The demands of being a carer can be substantial and many can have a negative impact on their physical and emotional health and well being. You should identify these and respond accordingly to ensure that caring has a minimal effect on the carer’s own life.
Issues that can impact on the carer include:
⮚ The time consuming nature of caring
⮚ The schedule of caring
⮚ The social stigma of caring
⮚ The restriction on working hours
⮚ The need to prioritise caring over other commitments
⮚ Losing the lifestyle they had prior to caring
⮚ Changes in personality of the person with support needs creating a sense of loss
⮚ The cost of caring for someone
⮚ Having to deal with funding and applications
⮚ The lack of external rewards for caring.
The impacts on the carer can include:
⮚ A decline in motional well being
⮚ Exhaustion
⮚ Financial difficulties
⮚ Grief and loss
⮚ Decline in other family relationships
⮚ Decline in physical health and well being/medical
⮚ Lack of social participation
⮚ Stress
⮚ Decline/lack of workforce participation.
Activity 3C
1.4 Provide carers and families with information about carer support services
By the end of this chapter, the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify the services/programs which the National Respite for Carer Program (NRCP) provides, who these are provided to, and what they entail.
Carer support services
You should provide carers and families with information about carer support services. National Respite for Carers Program (NRCP) is an initiative to support and assist relatives and friends caring for people with a disability or frailty at home.
Respite services
The National Respite for Carers Program (NRCP) ensures that over 5500 community-based respite services are provided to carers and their clients in a multitude of settings.
Commonwealth Respite and Carelink Centres
These are run across Australia by a variety of community organisations – they organise respite when carers need to take a break from caring.
Respite assistance can include:
⮚ In-home respite care
⮚ Support workers to assist if you take a break from your home e.g. holidays, other work commitments
⮚ Centre-based respite care (day care)
⮚ Residential respite care.
These centres work with existing community agencies to identify respite care needs of individuals and ensure that they have access to the necessary services.
NRCP Respite Service Providers' Program Manual
This manual is provided to all organisations receiving funding from the program – the current version came into effect on July 1 2012.
National Carer Counselling Program (NCCP)
This program provides short-term counselling and emotional/psychological support services for carers.
The aim of the program is to:
⮚ Help reduce carer stress
⮚ Improve coping skills of the carer
⮚ Assist carers to continue in their caring role.
Full information on respite services can be found at www.health.gov.au.
Other support includes:
⮚ Financial support – providing them with funding can help them afford extra services for the person they are caring for. It can also make up for the financial deficit caused by reducing working hours/not working due to care commitments.
⮚ Educational support – being educated on more efficient and effective care techniques can make it easier to do their duties. It can prevent the build up of other problems, like stress.
⮚ Social support – this will help them connect with other people in their situation and allow them to have a life outside of caring.
⮚ Counselling – if they are having mental or emotional difficulties with caring, talking to someone else about them can help them cope with them. Without expressing these, they can lead to more serious mental health problems.
⮚ Stress relieving techniques – this can help them deal with stress generated and make the demands easier to cope with.
Activity 3D
Summative Assessments
At the end of your Learner Workbook, you will find the Summative Assessments. This includes:
⮚ Skills assessment
⮚ Knowledge assessment
⮚ Performance assessment.
This holistically assesses your understanding and application of the skills, knowledge and performance requirements for this unit. Once this is completed, you will have finished this unit and be ready to move onto the next one – well done!
References
These suggested references are for further reading and do not necessarily represent the contents of this Learner Guide.
Age Discrimination Act 1977 – Carers' responsibilities amendment:
www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/num_act/aara2000n24553.pdf
Carer Recognition Act 2004: www.communities.wa.gov.au/communities-in-focus/carers/Pages/Carers- Recognition-Act.aspx
Carer Recognition Policy 2003 (QLD): http://www.qld.gov.au/web/community-engagement/guides- factsheets/people-disabilities/understanding-the-context.html
Carer support organisations and services: www.careaware.com.au/carers-resources/locate-services/
Carers Charter; Carer Recognition Legislation; State Carers Policy (SA): www.carers- sa.asn.au/publications/legislation;
Caring for Carers in the ACT – A plan for Action 2004-2007: www.dss.gov.au/our- responsibilities/disability-and-carers/publications-articles/international-review-of-future-planning- options#p4_1
Family dynamics: www.strongbonds.jss.org.au/reasons/dynamics.html; www.strongbonds.jss.org.au/workers/families/familydynamics.pdf
National Respite for Carers Program (NRCP): https://www.dss.gov.au/our-responsibilities/ageing-and- aged-care/overview/staying-at-home/national-respite-for-carers-program
All references accessed on and correct as of 05/10/2015, unless other otherwise stated.
1. Give examples of the different ways that you can respect the confidentiality and privacy of the carer, as well as the person with support needs.
*
2. If a carer confided in you and said they needed some help, what would you do?
*
3. Outline the services that may be required by the carer.
*
4. Outline issues that can have an impact on a carer
*
5. Outline the impacts these issues can have on a carer.
*
6. What services/programs does the National Respite for Carers Program (NRCP) provide, and to whom? What do these services/programs entail? 