Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge to provide services to an older person. It involves following and contributing to an established individual plan.
This unit applies to workers in a residential or community context, or those in personal care or support services that work with older people. Work performed requires some discretion and judgement and is carried out under regular direct or indirect supervision.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
1. Coordinate the delivery of the individualised plan
1.1 Identify and prioritise the needs, goals and preferences of the older person outlined in the individualised plan
1.2 Coordinate services and support activities in consultation with the older person and colleagues
1.3 Outline and clarify all service providers’ understanding of the individualised plan and their roles and responsibilities
1.4 Recognise signs consistent with financial, physical or emotional abuse or neglect of the older person and respond in line with organisation guidelines
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (such as language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills) that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Coordinated the service needs for at least 3 older people requiring varying levels or types of support.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ The social model of disability
⮚ Aspects of elder abuse, including:
o indications of neglect or abuse
o emotional impact of abuse
o appropriate management of issues surrounding abuse
⮚ Manifestations and presentation of common health problems associated with ageing, appropriate actions in response to these problems and when to refer
⮚ Role and function of various relevant health professionals
⮚ Relevant community and support services
⮚ Principles and practices of case management
⮚ Organisation standards, policies and procedures.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in an ageing support workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. These are situations relating to emergency or unplanned procedures where assessment in these circumstances would be unsafe, impractical or threatens the dignity of the older person. The following conditions must be met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
o individualised plans and any relevant equipment outlined in the plan
o organisation guidelines for abuse or neglect
Overall, assessment must involve workplace interactions with older people, colleagues, families/carers and working with the older person’s individualised plan.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - http://www.cshisc.com.au
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
1. Coordinate the delivery of the individualised plan
1.1.  Identify and prioritise the needs, goals and preferences of the older person outlined in the individualised plan
1.2.  Coordinate services and support activities in consultation with the older person and colleagues
1.3.  Outline and clarify all service providers’ understanding of the individualised plan and their roles and responsibilities
1.4.  Recognise signs consistent with financial, physical or emotional abuse or neglect of the older person and respond in line with organisation guidelines
1.1 – Identify and prioritise the needs, goals and preferences of the older person outlined in the individualised plan
By the end of this chapter the learner should be able to:
⮚ Highlight the sections that should be contained within an individualised plan
⮚ Establish the immediate, short-term, and long-term needs of individual
⮚ Identify the goals and preferences of elderly people and prioritise them in order of importance
⮚ Outline the rights of clients according to legislation.
Support and assistance for older people
The terms ‘elderly’ or ‘aged’ are considered to apply to those over 65 years old, but as the population lives for longer and our quality of life improves (e.g. better living conditions and nutrition), increasingly it is those of a much older age who most need assistance with health and care needs. This need tends to be for those who are frail or disabled.
Note: the above refers primarily to non-indigenous persons, indigenous persons tend to have shorter lifespans and aged care needs may be needed at an earlier age (50 years and over). Factors that contribute to this difference include excessive alcohol and tobacco use, poor nutrition and lower use of health services available.
There are other services available to people who are under 65 years of age, such as concessions with transport; what is available to an older person will depend largely upon their individual health, living conditions and support needs.
“It is generally understood that the greatest need for support is in the last two years of a person’s life.” (Source: Parliament of Australia website: http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/Publicat ions_Archive/archive/agedcare access date: 12.01.2017).
Services to assist and support older people can be provided by:
➢ Government:
o Commonwealth Government
o state/territory governments
o local governments
➢ Non-government:
o community services
o voluntary services
o private (for profit and not for profit) organisations.
The approach to care of older people is to maintain a person’s independence while providing support and healthcare as required; keeping people in their own homes and out of residential care for as long as possible. Commonwealth and state/territory governments have followed a direction of maintaining ‘ageing in place’, thereby using home care services where possible. There is also a high proportion of family, relatives and friends acting as carers for older persons in the home, and support for carers can also be given through assistance and respite services.
Maintaining a person’s own lifestyle, routines and independence within their own homes can greatly benefit a person’s wellbeing and state of mind. As such, there are many services available to provide care and support in and out of the home. Providing an individual care plan around the needs of a person is vital in ensuring that the right care and support is identified and given to patients/older persons and with their carers or family members.
Creating an individualised plan
To provide a person-centred approach to the health and care needs of a person, an individualised plan should be created to establish and carry out the exact care and support needs of an elderly person.
Your plan may include:
⮚ Identification of health condition and any illnesses of the person
⮚ Healthcare needs of the individual including care, treatment and diagnostic needs
⮚ Medications, therapy or other treatments given/required
⮚ Information regarding care arrangements, i.e. if a carer looks after the person, or if other family/friends provide support, such as taking the person out on shopping trips
⮚ Information about the client’s living arrangements/needs, if employed, their financial support situation, any visitors received and lifestyle factors, such as interests or leisure activities.
To develop a plan that is effective for an older person with health and care needs, a full assessment and recognition needs to be made of their health (both physical and mental) and consideration should be given to their own routines and preferences. Identifying how the individual lives and how they may respond to suggestions on health and care solutions is important for choosing the correct services and support options.
Determine the goals and how best to work with the older person in order to maintain their quality of life and health.
Negotiation/establishment of goals
As part of a person-centred approach to care, you should collaborate with the older person (in need of care/support), their advocate(s) and/or significant others in creating goals. These goals need to be in the client's interests and meet their legal rights. The goals you set should aim to empower the client and achieve maximum quality of life.
Clients’ interests
Part of your duty of care is to use your professional capacity to ensure that the client is attaining their optimum health, wellbeing and safety. To do this, you will need to understand and focus on their needs, choices and aspirations in life and do your best to support these.
To work towards your clients’ best interests usually involves:
⮚ Always acting in the clients’ best interests
⮚ Treating clients with respect and dignity
⮚ Adopting a consistently anti-discriminatory approach to work
⮚ Practising equality and fairness
⮚ Provide a client-centred service
⮚ Work with clients, instead of simply for them; try to establish a partnership, rather than an authoritative and restrictive carer-client relationship
⮚ Promote and respect clients’ decision making capacities
⮚ Focus on maintaining the safety of clients at all times.
These are examples of good practice and should be the basis of care provision, in line with duty of care.
Clients’ rights
All clients have specific rights, regardless of whether they are in their own environment or within a residential care home. These are specified in and protected by the Aged Care Act 1997.
Clients have the right to:
⮚ Appropriate care for their needs
⮚ Access information about their own medical details
⮚ A choice of suitable treatments
⮚ Be treated with dignity and respect
⮚ Live free from abuse and/or neglect
⮚ Not be discriminated against
⮚ Not be victimised
⮚ Not be exploited
⮚ Have privacy afforded to them
⮚ Be safe and secure in their environment
⮚ To be able to move around the building freely
⮚ To be treated as an individual
⮚ To have their individual preferences respected and considered
⮚ Maintain religious practices
⮚ Use their preferred language
⮚ Maintain social and personal relationships with others
⮚ Freedom of speech
⮚ Be able to make their own decisions
⮚ Control their own finances
⮚ Retain their own possessions
⮚ Choose which activities and similar they participate in
⮚ To have access to generally available community services and activities
⮚ Have a say over their living arrangements
⮚ Access to information about their rights
⮚ The right to complain
⮚ Not be afraid of reprisals arising and a result of complaint or query.
This list is not exhaustive but is meant as an example and a brief overview. Information on these rights should be available through your workplace and staff should be trained about them. It is part of your duty of care as a care professional to support these rights and clients who act upon them.
Decision-making
Clients have the right to make decisions about their care and daily lives, as is explained above. Clients should also be encouraged and given the opportunity to make smaller decisions on a day-to-day basis.
Decisions that clients include:
⮚ What to wear
⮚ What to eat
⮚ Who to talk to
1.2 – Coordinate services and support activities in consultation with the older person and colleagues
By the end of this chapter the learner should be able to:
⮚ Coordinate services and support activities in consultation with the older person
⮚ Consult with appropriate professionals to develop appropriate services for the client
⮚ Explain the specific problems relating to older people.
Determining the correct support
After considering the client’s wishes and taking into account their health needs and support, you should liaise with the appropriate services to establish the correct program of care and support activities.
Services for support and care include professionals such as GPs, medical specialists, home-carer, community/charitable organisations and groups, and therapists.
The types of communication you may have with these personnel include:
⮚ Liaison
⮚ Asking and clarifying
⮚ Seeking feedback
⮚ Providing information and reports
⮚ Identifying and exploring perceptions and expectations
⮚ Negotiation.
The idea is to use their expertise to come to an objective decision that is in the client's best interests. There may also be requirements to access care that you will have to contact these experts for assistance with/clarification.
Assessment for services
For each type of problem, there is a specific assessment tool to identify and assess the extent of the problems of an older person.
Older people may include:
⮚ Individuals living in residential aged care environments
⮚ Individuals living in the community
⮚ Prospective individuals to the service or services.
Aged care service provider assessments
These are specific assessments provided by the care providers to determine the level of assistance needed for the individual. They will depend on the provider and their specific protocols. Generally, patients will be asked for general health, specific health conditions and their ability to cope with general day-to-day living conditions.
Aged care assessment team (ACAT) assessments
In Australia, there are aged care assessment teams (ACATs) available to ensure that older people attain the most suitable care per their needs. They can help link them to community or residential aged care services, as well as if they need 'high care' or 'low care'. In fact, an ACAT assessment is a requirement before you apply to have the costs of care subsidised by the government. Further information on this can be found at the My Aged Care website: http://www.myagedcare.gov.au/eligibility-and- assessment/acat-assessments (access date: 12.01.2017).
Case conferences
Case conferencing is when GPs and medical personnel organise a meeting where a discussion of the client's multidisciplinary care needs is held – this requires a planned and coordinated approach. The idea is to identify the client's needs and figure out how to most effectively deliver them.
The people who are eligible are those with chronic or terminal conditions and complex care needs – they must receive services from their GP and at least two other health/care providers.
Chronic conditions are those which have been present for at least six months and include:
⮚ Asthma
⮚ Cancer
⮚ Diabetes
⮚ Stroke
⮚ Musculoskeletal conditions
⮚ Cardiovascular disease.
Case conferencing can occur in the community, for those recently discharged from hospital and for those in residential aged care.
The types of people that can be involved in a case conferencing team include:
⮚ Health professional
⮚ Home service providers
⮚ Community service providers
⮚ Education providers
⮚ "Meals on wheels" providers
⮚ Professional carers
⮚ Informal/family carers (though they do not "count" towards the required three members of the team)
⮚ Probation officers.
The presence of the actual patient is not required at a case conference, but they are allowed to attend (in some cases, this may be quite appropriate). Case conferences should only need to take place a maximum of five times, within any twelve month period.
The process of a case conference is as follows:
1. Discuss patients history
2. Identify multidisciplinary care needs
3. Identify outcomes to be achieved by team members
4. Identify tasks to achieve these outcomes and allocate them to team members
5. Assess whether previous goals have been achieved.
GPs have the following responsibilities at case conferences:
⮚ Explain the nature of the conference to the patient
⮚ Obtain patient consent to the GP's participation in the conference – this should be recorded
⮚ Record the details on the conferences and all matters discussed
⮚ Filing a copy of these records in the patient's medical records
⮚ Provide a summary of the case conference to the patient and other team members
⮚ Discuss the outcomes with the patient (and carer, if applicable).
Purpose designed tools
The specific tools and methods used for assessment will vary depending on the specific condition and situation of the older person.
The data collection methods for assessment may include:
⮚ Use of industry-specific assessment tools
⮚ Use of best practice focus assessment tools
⮚ Interviews
⮚ Observation
⮚ Review of previous health records
⮚ Consultation with the older person, their advocate/s, informal carer/s and/or significant other/s.
Assessment may involve accessing certain health records of the patient; they include:
⮚ Assessments
⮚ Plans of care
⮚ Case histories
⮚ Progress notes
⮚ Test results
⮚ Referral records
⮚ Observation charts
⮚ Medication charts.
Specific problems of the older person
The specific needs of the older person may be the result of their specific complex/special needs – these may include the following.
Mental health problem
You need to conduct a mental health risk assessment to determine whether a person may be suffering with mental health issues and/or to determine if they are at risk from suicide.
Alcohol and other drug misuse/abuse problem
The aims of alcohol and other drug misuse/abuse assessment include:
Chronic health problem
Any chronic health problem can be debilitating and lead to mental and physical symptoms manifesting in the patient. Chronic conditions are long-lasting ones that can be controlled but not cured.
They include things like:
⮚ Diabetes
⮚ Allergies
⮚ Asthma
⮚ Epilepsy
⮚ Glaucoma
⮚ Arthritis
⮚ Cancer
⮚ AIDS.
They must be assessed individually and managed through ongoing treatment and consultation with health specialists.
Activity 1B
1.3 – Outline and clarify all service providers’ understanding of the individualised plan and their roles and responsibilities
By the end of this chapter the learner should be able to:
⮚ Consult with various different service providers about the service option chosen by the client and their needs
⮚ Highlight roles and responsibilities to support staff and other service providers and agree on service requirements.
Responsibilities for carrying out care needs
It is important that services and care activities are performed only by those qualified to do them and by the correct service providers that have been identified for a person’s individual care plan.
Delegating activities to underqualified workers can be a safety risk and shows negligence. If work is delegated to an underqualified worker, adequate training will need to be given prior to undertaking the assigned role.
Remember that the person who delegates the activities remains responsible for the actions of the workers – they should inform the relevant people when delegating any of their responsibilities.
The health care workers who have been assigned certain roles are also responsible for their actions and should ensure they have the correct training, skills and knowledge to undertake the activities they have been given. They also need to comply with any policies that their organisation has set out and not mislead clients into thinking they are more qualified than they actually are.
When activities are delegated, the following should be considered:
⮚ The health status of the client
⮚ The difficulty/complexity of the activity
⮚ The care environment the client is in
⮚ The context of the activity/client
⮚ The knowledge/skill/experience of the care worker.
Case management
When people have complex and multiple needs, they may need to access services from various providers. Therefore, case management is required to ensure that all these services can be provided and aligned to meet the needs of the client. It can either be government subsidised or privately managed – it is often used by those with complex care needs who wish to remain living at home.
Clients should be monitored for their needs and progress – this should be done through case management on an individual basis.
Several different participative arrangements may be implemented at your workplace; depending upon your role, level of interest or department, you may or may not be required to participate in them. Your organisation should specify their expectations of you, including how many, if any you are required to attend and how many you may intend. The organisation should also make it clear how you can participate; generally, anyone is welcome to contribute, as the more ideas and opinions given, the more options and leads there are to follow. Some businesses, however, may choose to include only the relevant WHS staff and managers in their processes.
Determine all service providers' understanding of the individualised plan
It is important that all service providers have a thorough understanding of their roles and responsibilities within the individualised (service delivery) plan. Without this, the service delivery plan becomes a liability and the services may not be performed to the required standards (or at all).
You need to clarify understanding of this through effective communication and ensure they know the following:
⮚ What they are required to provide
⮚ When they are required to provide it
⮚ Who they are providing it to
⮚ How much of their service are they required to provide
⮚ The documentation they need to create
⮚ Who they should pass the documentation to
⮚ Contingency plans
⮚ The client's rights
⮚ Their rights
⮚ How their role contributes to the overall care plan of the client
⮚ Any special requirements/considerations of the clients.
Contribution in each instance may refer to:
⮚ Attendance at meetings
⮚ Behaviour that contributes to a safe working environment which includes following WHS procedures
⮚ Identifying and reporting risks and hazards
⮚ Input to care plans
⮚ Listening to the ideas and opinions of others in the team
⮚ Recommendations on changes to work processes, equipment or practices
⮚ Sharing opinions, views, knowledge and skills
⮚ Using equipment according to guidelines and operating manuals. The contribution will differ and vary from arrangement to arrangement.
Case management may involve the use of information technology systems, for the following purposes:
⮚ Recording patient and meetings data
⮚ Accessing patient and meetings data
⮚ Videoconferencing
⮚ Liaising with others involved in case management (email, Skype, etc.)
⮚ Researching available services.
Those involved must be fully trained in the use of IT equipment and the relevant programs, complying with WHS and organisational guidelines.
Numeracy skills may also be required, in order to calculate costs of services and manage budgets.
Activity 1C
1.4 – Recognise signs consistent with financial, physical or emotional abuse or neglect of the older person and respond in line with organisation guidelines
By the end of this chapter the learner should be able to:
⮚ Recognise signs that the older person has been subject to financial, physical or emotional abuse
⮚ Respond to instances of abuse or neglect in line with organisational guidelines.
Elderly people may be abused in their own homes, in care facilities or in relatives' homes.
Defining elderly abuse
Elderly abuse is any instance where someone takes advantage of an elderly person.
It can include:
⮚ Financial exploitation – this is the unauthorised use of an older person's money or their property by either a caregiver or an external party. The types of practices include:
o stealing money
o forging cheques/credit cards/accounts
o forging the older person's signature
o identity theft
o requesting them to pay money to claim a 'prize'
o charity scams
o investment fraud
⮚ Physical abuse – this is the deliberate use of force on an older person, causing them pain, injury or disability. It includes violent assaults, using drugs (inappropriately), restraining them or keeping them captive
⮚ Emotional abuse – also known as psychological abuse, this involves treating elderly people in any way that causes them distress or emotional pain. This can include:
o verbal abuse – threats, intimidation, yelling, humiliation, placing blame
o non-verbal abuse – ignoring, social isolation, terrorising behaviour

Questions:
1. How can an individualised plan assist in the care needs of an individual?
*
2. List seven clients’ rights that need to be considered when providing care and support services (as required under the Aged Care Act 1997).
*
3. When discussing and negotiating requirements for care/support with the client or other persons what do you need to take into account?
*
4. Name three cultural differences that an individual may have.
*
5. Why should you identify and prioritise the needs, goals and preferences of the older person for their individualised plan?
*
6. Briefly explain what the social model of disability is.
*
7. Why should you consult with other services/personnel when determining the correct program of care and support for the older person?
*
8. When assessing the requirements of the older person, why should you include them/their family or carer(s)?
*
9. Create a checklist of all the factors that you must consider when assessing the problems of an older person.  
*
10. What information do you need to clarify with service providers to ensure they know their roles and responsibilities within the individualised plan? Provide at least three examples.*
*
11. Create a table to outline the indicators of elder abuse and neglect, noting the different types of abuse. What are the appropriate response mechanisms?