Application
This unit describes the skills and knowledge to provide services to an older person. It involves following and contributing to an established individual plan.
This unit applies to workers in a residential or community context, or those in personal care or support services that work with older people. Work performed requires some discretion and judgement and is carried out under regular direct or indirect supervision.
The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
2. Liaise and negotiate with appropriate personnel and service providers
2.1 Support the older person to access and negotiate resources in order to deliver identified services
2.2 Support the older person to access community support agencies to facilitate the achievement of established goals
2.3 Recognise when a service and/or support worker is no longer able to provide the level of service required and take action to minimise disruption to service delivery
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (such as language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills) that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Coordinated the service needs for at least 3 older people requiring varying levels or types of support.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ The social model of disability
⮚ Aspects of elder abuse, including:
o indications of neglect or abuse
o emotional impact of abuse
o appropriate management of issues surrounding abuse
⮚ Manifestations and presentation of common health problems associated with ageing, appropriate actions in response to these problems and when to refer
⮚ Role and function of various relevant health professionals
⮚ Relevant community and support services
⮚ Principles and practices of case management
⮚ Organisation standards, policies and procedures.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in an ageing support workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. These are situations relating to emergency or unplanned procedures where assessment in these circumstances would be unsafe, impractical or threatens the dignity of the older person. The following conditions must be met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
o individualised plans and any relevant equipment outlined in the plan
o organisation guidelines for abuse or neglect
Overall, assessment must involve workplace interactions with older people, colleagues, families/carers and working with the older person’s individualised plan.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - http://www.cshisc.com.au
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
2. Liaise and negotiate with appropriate personnel and service providers
2.1.  Support the older person to access and negotiate resources in order to deliver identified services
2.2.  Support the older person to access community support agencies to facilitate the achievement of established goals
2.3.  Recognise when a service and/or support worker is no longer able to provide the level of service required and take action to minimise disruption to service delivery
2.1 – Support the older person to access and negotiate resources in order to deliver identified services
By the end of this chapter the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify the health and care services by clients depending on their needs and goals
⮚ Help to obtain the correct services that the client requires as part of their individualised plan.
Obtain the correct services
Depending upon the healthcare and support needs of the older person, there are a wide range of resources and services available for those living at home and in residential care. Services will encompass all medical and healthcare needs, assistance and enabling needs and any further support needs.
From your assessment and the creation of the individualised care plan, resources and services can be identified and put into place for the individual.
Health and care services include:
⮚ Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Worker
⮚ Care assistant/worker
⮚ Community care worker
⮚ Community support services
⮚ Dietician
⮚ Diversional therapist
⮚ Drug and alcohol worker
⮚ Geriatrician
⮚ Home care worker
⮚ In-home respite worker
⮚ Neuropsychologist and behaviour consultant for people with an acquired brain injury
⮚ Nursing assistant
⮚ Occupational therapist
⮚ Pain specialist
⮚ Palliative care specialist
⮚ Personal care assistant/worker
⮚ Pharmacist
⮚ Physiotherapist
⮚ Psychiatrist
⮚ Psychologist
⮚ Registered nurse
⮚ Respiratory technician
⮚ Social worker
⮚ Speech pathologist
⮚ Wound consultant.
Within the medical profession and the services available, you should look to obtain the correct specialists and resource requirements to support the care of the older person. Follow your organisational procedures and requirements to seek and put this into place.
Programs to support the care of the aged
The Commonwealth Government and state/territory governments provide assistance to older people for their health and care needs. There are different programs and options available to help support older persons healthcare in the home, through a process of assessment for eligibility.
Commonwealth Home Support Program
This commenced on the 1st July 2015 and has been developed to provide services for the aged and their carers. This looks to offer fast access to entry-level support services, reducing red-tape for service providers through a streamlined funding system.
It combines the following four programs into one overall service:
⮚ Commonwealth Home and Community Care (HACC) Program
⮚ Planned respite from the National Respite for Carers Program (NRCP)
⮚ Day Therapy Centres (DTC) Program
⮚ Assistance with Care and Housing for the Aged (ACHA) Program.
Further information on this can be found at: https://agedcare.health.gov.au/programs/commonwealth- home-support-programme (access date: 12.01.2017).
Services that are available through the Commonwealth Home Support program include:
⮚ Domestic help around the home, e.g. cleaning and ironing clothes
⮚ Personal care needs
⮚ Maintenance in the home, e.g. replacing lightbulbs
⮚ Modifications within the home to support the individual’s needs
⮚ Nursing care.
Home Care Packages Program
A home care package will be coordinated by an approved home care provider and, if eligible, funding is provided by the Australian Government (as under the Aged Care Act 1997). When able to stay at home, different personal services and support can be arranged to the needs of the person.
Note: as of 1st July 2015, all home care packages are to be delivered on a consumer directed care (CDC) basis.
The four levels of home care packages are:
⮚ Home care level 1 – those with basic care needs
⮚ Home care level 2 – those with low level care needs
⮚ Home care level 3 – those with intermediate care needs
⮚ Homecare level 4 – those with high level care needs.
Source and further information can be found at: https://agedcare.health.gov.au/programs/home-care- packages-programme (access date: 12.01.2017).
Home and Community Care (HACC)
This scheme provides funding to support older frail people (as well as younger disabled people), along with their carers it aims to support those living at home to have access to basic support and continue living independently. This prevents them having to go into residential care, which is more costly and a major lifestyle change.
It is funded by the Australian and Victorian governments and is covered by the HACC amending agreement made in 1998. Full details can be found at www.health.vic.gov.au/hacc (access date: 12.01.2017).
Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA)
Established in 1976, this department of the government deals with delivering government programs for those involved in military duty during their lifetime. Broadly speaking, within the aged care sector, they work within the realm of income support and health matters for military veterans.
The applicable legislation that it is responsible for includes:
⮚ Defence Service Homes Act 1918
⮚ Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2004
⮚ Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
⮚ Veterans Entitlements Act 1986
⮚ War Graves Act 1980.
Flexible care
Under the Aged Care Act 1997, there are three types of flexible care options available through the Australian Government. These recognise the many different needs of older people seeking care and offer a flexible approach. Restorative care, for those who may have experienced an illness or a fall, offers short-term care for an older person through their recovery period. This care is for older persons who are still able to maintain their independence after their experience.
Transition care
This type of flexible care offers specific therapy services or goal-setting to enable an older person to regain their level of health and independence after an illness or operation. This support is managed by the state and territory governments and works with other services to provide the correct care package. To be eligible for this type of care, the older person must have an ACAT assessment (as briefly mentioned in section 1.2 of this unit).
Multi-purpose services
This program is tailored to small rural and remote areas of Australia and is operated by the Australian Government and the state/territory governments. It aims to provide integrated health and care services in areas where this would not normally be sustainable.
Innovative care (‘innovative pool’)
This initiative provides flexible care to those who would not benefit from mainstream services, so those who require a different approach or new methods of care/therapies will be able to receive the care that they need.
National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Flexible Aged Care Program
This program has been initiated by the Government to provide assistance via a separate collective group (panel). They offer advice and assistance to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders and care providers anywhere in Australia who are in need of aged care services or help. This operates outside of the Aged Care Act 1997.
Residential care
When an older person is no longer able to maintain their health and care needs at home with the support of services, residential care provides further care options. Residential aged care is subsidised by the Commonwealth Government and is governed by the Aged Care Act 1997 to provide clear guidance on acceptable levels of care. For an individual to enter into subsidised residential care, an ACAT assessment will need to take place.
For those who are not eligible for government assistance/funding, private residential care homes are available at a cost to the individual.
Residential respite
Residential respite is also available to those who are deemed eligible through an ACAT assessment (the assessment of the person receiving care). This is designed to give respite to both carer(s) and the older person receiving the care. It can be a planned residential arrangement or one of an emergency. If eligible, 63 days in each year for residential respite is available for the older person to receive within a residential home.
Source and further information can be found at the Department of Social Services website: https://agedcare.health.gov.au/programs (access date: 12.01.2017).
Activity 2A
2.2 – Support the older person to access community support agencies to facilitate the achievement of established goals
By the end of this chapter the learner should be able to:
⮚ Assist the older person in obtaining information and support from relevant agencies
⮚ Provide clients with details on how to access Government community care services.
Once you have identified the appropriate services for the client based on their condition(s) and preferences, the next step is accessing the necessary resources to implement these services. Accessing these resources will involve discussion and negotiation with health professionals and the subsequent providers of the chosen services.
Community support agencies can also support the individual in reaching their goals. You should assist the older person in obtaining the correct information and support from the relevant agencies to help them in achieve this.
You can:
⮚ Provide relevant information on the areas of health, care and welfare needs relevant to the older person and their family/carer(s)
⮚ Explain the different options available to them through support agencies
⮚ Assist the older person or family/carer(s) in making contact with the relevant agencies
⮚ Help the older person/their family or carer(s) to determine their exact support needs from community support agencies
⮚ Help establish the required services/support.
Government community care
There are schemes and policies implemented by the Australian government to help with aged care in the community.
These include:
⮚ Supported residential services – the department of Health is responsible for delivering the Supported Residential Services (Private Proprietors) Act 2010 and the Supported Residential Services (Private Proprietors) Regulations 2012. This ensures that residents in private residential accommodation services have their safety and wellbeing monitored, as well as recognising their rights
⮚ Public sector residential aged care – through Service planning and development, the health services are able to effectively provide public sector residential care in the communities, in keeping with policy directions
⮚ Personal alert systems – this is a personal monitoring and emergency service funded by the government. The purpose is that it allows those who live at home to call for emergency assistance 24 hours a day by just pressing a button on a device. This enhances their confidence and ability to live independently at home
⮚ Elder abuse prevention and response – this helps protect elderly people from abuse from carers and other caregivers
⮚ Hoarding and squalor – this aims to prevent elderly people living at home from living in unsuitable living conditions, where quality of life and the ability of effective home care services is prevented. It can pose all sorts of risks, including:
o personal safety
o fire risk
o mental health
o disability
o child protection
o animal protection
o sanitation
o physical health
o housing
o building safety
⮚ Dementia – this includes the Pathways scheme (launched in April 2006). The types of issues covered include:
o promoting positive ageing and social connectedness
o life planning
o education and information for the public
o service development and enhancement
o support for people with dementia and their unpaid carers
o respite and residential accommodation
o transitions from living at home to residential aged care
o meeting specific needs
⮚ Carers – the Carers Recognition Act 2012 ensures organisations that provide care support have to provide annual reports to ensure that they are complying with the requirements set out in the Act. The main principles of the Act concern respect, support and recognition for the carers
⮚ Aged care land bank – this ensures that land is made available at reduced prices for those companies wishing to provide residential aged care
⮚ Medication administration – the Drugs Poisons and Controlled Substances Regulations 2006 ensure that all high care residents have their medication managed by a Registered Nurse of Division 1, 3 or 4. However, it means that the administration of the medication can be done by lower down personnel, making more efficient use of health care resources.
Through the Department of Social Services – my aged care website, there is a Community Visitors Scheme (CVS) – this enables social interaction for the older person through a community visitor. Older persons who have a home care package may be eligible for a CVS visitor who will be matched with the older person’s hobbies, interests and likes in order to become a regular visitor to the person’s house. Further information can be found at: http://www.myagedcare.gov.au/living-aged-care-home/social- activities (access date: 13.01.2017).
Community support agencies
Community support agencies offer assistance to those in aged care and those seeking advocacy and information. They offer essential support alongside medical and government establishments. There are also support agencies for specific medical/health conditions that can also provide support to the older person and their family/carer(s).
These include:
⮚ Advocare Incorporated – a community-based, not for profit organisation, see their website at: http://www.advocare.org.au/
⮚ Aged and Community Services Australia (ACSA) – this is the national peak body for church, charitable and community-based organisations which offer accommodation and care services to
older people, those with a disability and their carers. Further information can be found at their website: http://www.acsa.asn.au/
⮚ Carers Australia – the national peak body for carers, supporting their needs and providing a voice to concerns and issues; further information can be found at their website: http://www.carersaustralia.com.au/home/
(All websites above were accessed on 13.01.2017.)
Activity 2B
2.3 – Recognise when a service and/or support worker is no longer able to provide the level of service required and take action to minimise disruption to service delivery
By the end of this chapter the learner should be able to:
⮚ Identify scenarios where a service or support worker can no longer provide adequate assistance to a client
⮚ Perform checks on the services being provided and ensure that they are meeting the requirements of the individualised care plan
⮚ Consult with the older person and/or their family to check for satisfaction with the service provided.
Keep a check on the service and support provided
There may come a point where a service/support worker is unable to continue providing the level of service required – this can be down to the older person having a progressive condition which, as it gets worse, requires an extra level of service that their original worker is not qualified or able to provide.
It may also be caused by a change in circumstance with the support worker, such as maternity leave or a change of job role. You may also find that a service makes changes to its delivery of service or to procedures, which no longer support certain persons in your care.
Reasons that a service/care worker can no longer provide the level of service may include things such as:
⮚ Lack of qualifications
⮚ Client's progressive condition worsens
⮚ Client's financial circumstances change
⮚ Client-carer relationship becomes untenable
⮚ Client or carer moves to an inaccessible location
⮚ Carer does not have enough allocated time to provide all required services.
Maintain skill requirements
It is vital that you, other relevant workers and services keep up to date with legislation and training requirements for service provision. If current workers are unable or unqualified to provide the appropriate level of service required for the client, provisions must be made to either re-train the service/support workers or switch the client to a more suitable service/support worker.
For whatever reason that the service or support worker is no longer able to provide the required care/health services, ensure the necessary changes are made and carried out professionally with the needs of the older person kept in mind. Make changes effective and always assess how these are implemented and maintained to ensure that the service or support worker is working appropriately.
You should identify:
⮚ If the needs of the older person are being met
⮚ If not, which parts of the service are not working as required
⮚ How to make the changes with minimal disruption to both person and service delivery.
Assessing services provided
To regularly assess that the level of service meets the requirements, you should keep a check on performance levels of the services provided, and the health and support needs of the older person. Make sure you correctly assess and recognise where changes may, or have occurred, and perform regular evaluations to ensure the correct care package is being delivered.
You should:
⮚ Make checks on the care needs of the older person to ensure they are still receiving the right level of care from all services/the support worker
⮚ Check that the services provided are meeting the requirements of the individualised care plan
⮚ Assess how the service/support worker are providing care to the older person
⮚ Talk with/discuss with the older person/family or carer(s) to check how they are receiving the level of care/service required and whether this is meeting their needs
⮚ Perform regular reviews with the service/support worker to ensure that the right care is being provided to the older person/their family or carer(s) and assess if needs are being met or have changed.
Once you have identified if changes to service delivery need to be made, ensure that these are carried out efficiently and with minimal disruption to the current delivery. Coordinate the necessary arrangements so that all changes can be implemented smoothly and systematically.

Questions:
1. Name ten health and care services/individuals you may need to support the care of an older person.
*
2. List three different health and care programs that are available for older persons through the Commonwealth and/or state/territory governments.
*
3. In approximately 250 words, explain how you can help support an older person to access community support agencies.
*
4. How can you determine whether a service and/or a support worker is not able to carry on providing the required level of service? Suggest at least two ways that this could take place.