Chapter 3
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
3. Support family and carers
3.1 Recognise the impact of support issues on the carer/s and families and refer appropriately
3.2 Provide support and respite for carer/s
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (such as language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills) that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Coordinated the service needs for at least 3 older people requiring varying levels or types of support.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ The social model of disability
⮚ Aspects of elder abuse, including:
o indications of neglect or abuse
o emotional impact of abuse
o appropriate management of issues surrounding abuse
⮚ Manifestations and presentation of common health problems associated with ageing, appropriate actions in response to these problems and when to refer
⮚ Role and function of various relevant health professionals
⮚ Relevant community and support services
⮚ Principles and practices of case management
⮚ Organisation standards, policies and procedures.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in an ageing support workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. These are situations relating to emergency or unplanned procedures where assessment in these circumstances would be unsafe, impractical or threatens the dignity of the older person. The following conditions must be met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
o individualised plans and any relevant equipment outlined in the plan
o organisation guidelines for abuse or neglect
Overall, assessment must involve workplace interactions with older people, colleagues, families/carers and working with the older person’s individualised plan.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - http://www.cshisc.com.au
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
3.1.  Recognise the impact of support issues on the carer/s and families and refer appropriately
3.2.  Provide support and respite for carer/s
3.1 – Recognise the impact of support issues on the carer/s and families and refer appropriately
3.2 – Provide support and respite for carer/s
By the end of this chapter the learner should be able to:
⮚ Recognise various support issues on the carer/s and families of the older person and their impacts
⮚ Maintain effective communication with carer/s and families and refer to them to appropriate resources or support systems
⮚ Provide support and respite for carer/s where required
⮚ Provide advice to carer/s or support staff on how to prevent personal issues impacting on service provided.
The carer(s) and family may be put in situations of stress while caring for the older person. Caring is a full-time situation, even when respite may be given, the health and care of a client/loved one will very much be of concern to the carer(s) and on the minds of the family.
Providing support to carers and families through times of stress, or when making decisions over care requirements, is important to the wellbeing of all. Recognising how caring for another person can affect a person will help you to provide more effective support and assistance.
Signs of stress
There are ten signs of stress in caregivers/family members:
1. Denial – refusing to accept the reality of the disease and inevitable effects on the person with the illness
2. Anger – at the person diagnosed, that no cure exists or the reactions of other people
3. Depression – giving in to the inevitability of the situation and seeing no point in doing anything
4. Anxiety – worrying about what will happen in the future
5. Social withdrawal – becoming reclusive from activities and friends you used to do/see
6. Sleeplessness – due to worrying and inability to relax e.g. going over possibilities in your head while lying in bed
7. Exhaustion – leading to a lack of desire to complete everyday tasks – they tend to stop taking care of themselves
8. Irritability – triggering negative responses and moodiness
9. Health problems – susceptibility to illnesses due to the mental and physical burden
10. Trouble concentrating – making it difficult to function and perform tasks that were once second nature.
Other issues that may impact carers are the following types of burden:
⮚ Financial
⮚ Time
⮚ Grief/loss
⮚ Social isolation
⮚ Relationship difficulties
If you suspect that family members or carers are experiencing difficulties with looking after an older person, make time to discuss this with them in a considerate manner that is supportive to their needs. Keep in mind that when individuals are under duress or stress that they may react emotionally or aggressively as a result of the situation, not your enquiry. Be supportive and understanding of their needs and look to provide them with appropriate guidance. Knowing that you are there, in a professional and caring capacity may be all that they need.
Effective communications
You will come into contact with many types of people from different backgrounds and cultures. To communicate well with others you will need to have excellent interpersonal skills to discuss care requirements and to listen to the older person receiving care and their family/carer(s). Establishing a rapport is essential for developing good working relationships. This helps you to get to know the people you meet and work with, and will enable you to build trust and respect.
Be understanding of the needs of other people; always speak clearly, concisely and be friendly. Take the lead in providing open and respectful discussions and make time to explain technical requirements and terminology that may not be familiar to the people you work with. If you need to communicate non- verbally, ensure you are equipped to provide appropriate written communications or other forms of communication, such as sign language.
Use reflective listening skills to understand what others are communicating to you. As well as clarifying what has just been spoken/communicated (by restating this back) this method of listening also seeks to interpret the feelings and emotions of the communicator to make a full understanding.
Providing a supportive environment for client, carers and families
The presence of a care/support worker can be a positive influence with both the older person and their family/carer(s). As well as assisting with their health and care needs, answering questions and discussing health and care situations allows them to understand and to be informed of the older person’s situation. By discussing their loved one with a professional person, it enables families/carers to work through thoughts and feelings, and to understand what their loved one is going through and how best to support them.
Resources/support systems
There are a number of support services and organisations that can provide information and support to families and carers living with the care of an older person. By giving families and carers access to this information and knowledge they can be empowered to regain balance with their care duties and own needs.
They include:
⮚ Commonwealth Respite and Carelink Centres (1800 059 059)– information on community care programs and services to allow dementia sufferers to live at home
⮚ Carer Advisory and Counselling Service – information and advice for carers on entitlements and relevant services
⮚ Doctors
⮚ Local councils
⮚ Local community health centre
⮚ Alzheimer's Australia (1800 100 500)
⮚ Aged Care Assessment Services (1300 135 090)
⮚ My Aged Care (1800 200 422)
⮚ Cognitive Dementia and Memory Service clinics (1300 135 090)
⮚ Carers Victoria (1800 242 636)
⮚ Dementia Behaviour Management Advisory Service (1800 699 799).
Sharing the workload
It is important that families and carers make time for themselves and maintain their own lives as best as possible. Help can be sought from doctors, psychologists, social workers and counsellors to support caring for an older person. You can also enquire whether the family or carer(s) have any relatives or close friends that can help them to manage and look after the older person at different times/occasions. This can give the carer/family a brief time away as a respite from providing full-time care, for example, cooking/assisting with meals, shopping, and housework.
External help can offer up services such as day centres, where the person in care can be left while the carer has a short break from their responsibilities. This can allow a full-time carer/family member, time away to attend to their own needs and responsibilities.
Maintaining your own wellbeing
As well as caring for clients and checking that families and carers are receiving the right support, you should also monitor your own health. One of the main factors related to working with people in end-of- life care is stress; this is because of the high demands, in terms of time, the burden of caring for someone and the financial (if informal care) and social impacts of caring.
Managing your stress levels
In order to minimise the amount of stress you experience from working with people in care, you should try and implement the following:
⮚ Develop a consistent schedule
⮚ Remember not to blame the person with dementia for their behaviour
⮚ Educate yourself on the effects of dementia and strategies for managing it
⮚ Talk to family, friends, or other people in a similar situation
⮚ Take care of yourself – manage your diet, take regular exercise and maintain a social life
⮚ Be realistic about your ability to carry out required tasks – if you take care of yourself, the quality of your care increases.
As well as stress, there are a myriad of other feelings a care worker may experience, such as guilt, anger, grief and loss. Whatever the feelings, it is important to have systems of dealing with them, so as not to be overcome by them.
These could include:
⮚ Allowing expression of feelings (rather than bottling them up)
⮚ Crying
⮚ Talking (sharing feelings can be cathartic)
⮚ Keep a journal – writing feelings down can help you understand them and process them more easily
⮚ Don't become consumed by the feelings
⮚ Perform comforting rituals/behaviours
⮚ Think carefully before you make any decisions on your feelings
⮚ Find a balance between the negative feelings and positive ones in life
⮚ Rediscover your sense of humour.

Questions:
1. What impact might support issues have on the carers and families?
*
2. Who would you refer the carers and families to if there is a support issue having a negative impact on them?
*
3. How can you, in your role, support and respite be provided to carers to alleviate these aforementioned issues?