The skills in this unit must be applied in accordance with Commonwealth and State/Territory legislation, Australian/New Zealand standards and industry codes of practice.
Unit Mapping Information
No equivalent unit.
Performance Criteria
Element
Elements describe the essential outcomes.
Performance Criteria
Performance criteria describe the performance needed to demonstrate achievement of the element.
4. Coordinate feedback  4.1 Explain to all service providers the mechanism/s for
providing feedback on the effectiveness of the individualised plan
4.2 Obtain feedback from service providers on the effectiveness of the individualised plan and report to supervising health professional
4.3 Seek feedback from the older person and/or their advocate and report to supervising health professional
4.4 Support the older person to seek advice and assistance from relevant health professionals when their goals are not being reached
Foundation Skills
The Foundation Skills describe those required skills (such as language, literacy, numeracy and employment skills) that are essential to performance.
Foundation skills essential to performance are explicit in the performance criteria of this unit of competency.
Assessment Requirements
Performance Evidence
The candidate must show evidence of the ability to complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the job role. There must be evidence that the candidate has:
⮚ Coordinated the service needs for at least 3 older people requiring varying levels or types of support.
Knowledge Evidence
The candidate must be able to demonstrate essential knowledge required to effectively complete tasks outlined in elements and performance criteria of this unit, manage tasks and manage contingencies in the context of the work role. This includes knowledge of:
⮚ The social model of disability
⮚ Aspects of elder abuse, including:
o indications of neglect or abuse
o emotional impact of abuse
o appropriate management of issues surrounding abuse
⮚ Manifestations and presentation of common health problems associated with ageing, appropriate actions in response to these problems and when to refer
⮚ Role and function of various relevant health professionals
⮚ Relevant community and support services
⮚ Principles and practices of case management
⮚ Organisation standards, policies and procedures.
Assessment Conditions
Skills must have been demonstrated in an ageing support workplace with the addition of simulations and scenarios where the full range of contexts and situations have not been provided in the workplace. These are situations relating to emergency or unplanned procedures where assessment in these circumstances would be unsafe, impractical or threatens the dignity of the older person. The following conditions must be met for this unit:
⮚ Use of suitable facilities, equipment and resources, including:
o individualised plans and any relevant equipment outlined in the plan
o organisation guidelines for abuse or neglect
Overall, assessment must involve workplace interactions with older people, colleagues, families/carers and working with the older person’s individualised plan.
Assessors must satisfy the Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015/AQTF mandatory competency requirements for assessors.
Links
Companion volumes from the CS&HISC website - http://www.cshisc.com.au
Companion Volume implementation guides are found in VETNet - https://vetnet.education.gov.au/Pages/TrainingDocs.aspx?q=5e0c25cc-3d9d-4b43-80d3-bd22cc4f1e53
4. Coordinate feedback
4.1.  Explain to all service providers the mechanism/s for providing feedback on the effectiveness of the individualised plan
4.2.  Obtain feedback from service providers on the effectiveness of the individualised plan and report to supervising health professional
4.3.  Seek feedback from the older person and/or their advocate and report to supervising health professional
4.4.  Support the older person to seek advice and assistance from relevant health professionals when their goals are not being reached
4.1 – Explain to all service providers the mechanism/s for providing feedback on the effectiveness of the individualised plan
By the end of this chapter the learner should be able to:
⮚ Check organisational procedures in relation to documenting the care that is being provided
⮚ Communicate expectations for providing feedback to all service providers.
Determine all service providers’ understanding of the mechanism/s for providing feedback
Service providers must be made aware of the feedback mechanisms that operate to meet the needs of the individualised plan. This understanding must be clarified with them, so they can provide said feedback within organisational guidelines.
They will need to know the following:
⮚ How often to provide feedback
⮚ What format feedback should be completed in
⮚ Who to send feedback to
⮚ How detailed feedback should be
⮚ Acceptable mediums of feedback
⮚ Specific issues that require feedback
⮚ Legal issues of feedback (privacy, confidentiality).
Your organisation will have set procedures that need to be maintained and a legal requirement to document the work that is performed and to monitor the care of individuals within your service.
Within the medical and healthcare sector, records of clients’/patients’ care are vital to ensuring that the correct level of care is assessed and given; they also help enable further health and care evaluations to be made to determine any future requirements.
They convey accurate medical and healthcare information on the client/patient which in turn may need to be communicated to other medical professionals and specialists. This process of documenting and recording information provides an effective system for cross-service delivery of care.
Communicate to all service providers
Provide clear guidance to all your service providers on the expectations for giving feedback. If certain information is needed, you could send the appropriate forms/templates to ensure that information is recorded appropriately. Let them know the requirements they need to fulfil, as designated in the individualised plan of the older person.
You may want to communicate in person, by telephone or by email; this will depend upon the location of your service providers and their availability to receive your communication. Establish your contacts and communicate with your service providers regularly to let them know when you require information to be sent to you. You should also check that services are being provided as expected to the older person and whether there are any issues to be discussed.
Activity 4A
4.2 – Obtain feedback from service providers on the effectiveness of the individualised plan and report to supervising health professional
4.3 – Seek feedback from the older person and/or their advocate and report to supervising health professional
By the end of this chapter the learner should be able to:
⮚ Establish and follow organisational procedures in relation to gathering feedback from service providers
⮚ Use active listening and responding to gain feedback from service providers regarding the effectiveness of the individualised plan
⮚ Establish and follow organisational procedures in relation to gathering feedback from the older person and/or their advocate
⮚ Report all relevant information to the correct supervising health professional.
You will need to seek feedback from the service providers and the older person in care about the effectiveness of the individualised plan. This will require active listening skills and a documentation system for feedback.
Active listening and responding
Active listening is a form of communicating that requires the listener to feedback what they hear to the speaker, by way of restating or paraphrasing what they have heard in their own words. This helps both parties clarify and confirm what is being communicated. Empathic/active listening is the most effective form of communication between people in a professional context – it is functional, mechanical and leaves little room for assumptions/interpretation. Feedback shows understanding and involves both verbal and non-verbal communication.
When someone is listening to the words being spoken by another, they are also taking note of the way the words are being spoken. Often, workers/clients can find it difficult to express their feelings in words and non-verbal cues can express a client's feelings more effectively. When you communicate through active listening, it shows respect for the client/service provider and validates their worth. This enhances their self-esteem which, in turn, enables them to relax and means they are less likely to put up defensive barriers.
OARS skills (open-ended questions, affirmations, reflections, summaries) are one example of empathic listening skills because they are all about listening in a heartfelt manner without trying to change or
push the individual. These OARS skills come from a therapy called Motivational Interviewing, developed by Professor William R Miller.
Documentation and reporting
There are certain things that need to be reported and documented in the care industry, such as:
⮚ Accidents and injuries
⮚ Clients’ progress
⮚ Medical care and medication
⮚ Mandatory notification.
These examples and similar ones are likely to have information and evidence gathered by a care provider, which is communicated to a supervisor, for record-keeping or for action to be taken.
Ensure that you follow organisational procedures when gathering feedback; this ensures that:
⮚ Reports are received correctly
⮚ Reports are sent to the right person
⮚ All required reports are gathered
⮚ Reports are in the appropriate format and include all required information
⮚ Reports are handled correctly.
You will have your organisation’s expectations made clear to you before you complete any reports or need to report anything. If in doubt or unsure, double-check with a supervisor or colleague.
Present your documentation in the required format and report all the necessary information to the correct supervising health professional.
Common areas for improvement in residential care
While improvements will be individual to the organisation in question, the following areas are applicable to most residential care providers:
⮚ Responding to residents and their needs – using feedback from residents is great for the following:
o increasing awareness and involvement of residents in improvement
o integration of resident feedback into the home's quality management system
o shaping the direction of the home so it is customer-focussed
⮚ Leadership-driven organisational improvement – improvement should be high on the agenda of the home. Improvements should become part of the mission statement of the home and include contributions from key stakeholders
⮚ Process and systems focus – you need to understand and manage the way work is done in order to improve. Critically evaluate the work is done, the way jobs relate to each other and the outcomes of processes
⮚ Ongoing use of appropriate data – data is essential in analysing any service, providing a quantitative measurement upon which to base improvements. It can also be used to evaluate against accreditation standards
⮚ Development and involvement of staff – involving the people who work in the homes will ensure accurate feedback close to the organisation – it allows for ongoing staff development also
⮚ Quality improvement and self-assessment as part of the culture – planning, reviews and service development should be part of everyday practices so staff and the organisation are continually conducting self-assessments. Internal reviews are just as important as external accreditation and audits.
Activity 4B
4.4 – Support the older person to seek advice and assistance from relevant health professionals when their goals are not being reached
By the end of this chapter the learner should be able to:
⮚ Support the older person by referring them to the appropriate health professionals when their goals are not being attained
⮚ Recognise potential causes of goals not being reached and provide assistance where possible.
Seeking advice from relevant health professionals
If the client's goals are not being reached, you may need to seek assistance from relevant health professionals and determine why this is the case. You will need to make the person’s goals achievable, and a readjustment of goals or service delivery may be required.
These health professionals may include:
⮚ Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Worker
⮚ Carer – to determine how the older person is responding to current care received
⮚ Dietician – to check if assistance in achieving a balanced and nutritious diet is needed
⮚ Diversional therapist – for participation in suitable recreational/leisure activities
⮚ Drug and alcohol worker – in cases where substance abuse may be a factor
⮚ Geriatrician – for any general ageing effects concerns
⮚ Neuropsychologist and behaviour consultant for people with an acquired brain injury
⮚ Occupational therapist – to establish activities that the older person can safely do
⮚ Pain specialist – if the person is experiencing fluctuations in management or new pains
⮚ Palliative care specialist – to determine if the correct care approach is being made
⮚ Pharmacist – to ensure the correct medication is received
⮚ Physiotherapist – to help improve mobility needs
⮚ Psychiatrist – for mental health needs
⮚ Psychologist – for managing mental health
⮚ Registered nurse – for further medical assistance
⮚ Respiratory technician – if difficulty in breathing is experienced
⮚ Social worker – to determine the correct services
⮚ Speech Pathologist – for assisting in communication difficulties
⮚ Wound consultant – to assess the nature of any wounds, especially those that do not heal easily.
Which one(s) of these you consult specifically will depend on the client you are dealing with and their individual needs.
You will need to enlist their assistance in order to decide on the relevant strategy for resolving the goals – it can involve reassessment by health professionals to determine the eligibility of the client to receive extra government funded care services.
If the goals of the older person are not being reached, you need to determine the primary cause before you can begin to solve the problem.
The causes may include:
⮚ The older person develops new physical/psychological problems
⮚ The older persons has problems with mobility
⮚ Loss of family/friends able to assist with care duties
⮚ The person has moved into a residential care home
⮚ The older person cannot deal with organising and taking their medication
⮚ Progressive conditions have worsened e.g. Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, dementia, etc.
⮚ Drug/alcohol abuse
⮚ Lack of adequate nutrition.

Questions:
1. What information do you need to clarify with service providers to ensure they know the feedback mechanisms for providing information on the effectiveness of the service delivery plan?
*
2. What skills are required in order to seek feedback from service providers and the older person about the effectiveness of the service delivery plan?
*
3. Why might an older person's goals not be being reached? Who might you need to consult in these cases?